The world in brief
August 7, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A deadline set by the Economic Community of West African States for the restoration of civilian government in Niger passed without incident. ECOWAS, a regional bloc, had threatened military intervention should the junta that seized power in Niger last month fail to allow President Mohamed Bazoum to return to office by Sunday. Supporters of the army filled a stadium in the capital, Niamey, and joined security forces to patrol the streets. France has said it would support an ECOWAS intervention, but some African countries have been sceptical.

Ukraine’s army said it had struck two bridges connecting the occupied Crimean peninsula to the region of Kherson. The region’s Russian-appointed governor said that a ruptured pipeline had left 20,000 people in the town of Henichesk without gas supplies. The Ukrainian attack follows heavy Russian missile and drone strikes across Ukraine on Saturday night, including one on a blood-transfusion centre in the country’s north-east.

Scientists in America produced net energy in a fusion reaction for a second time, following a breakthrough in December, according to the Financial Times. The second experiment, in which high-powered lasers force the fusion of hydrogen isotopes, releasing energy in the process, reportedly yielded a greater output than the first. Scientists hope that fusion energy might one day provide an abundant source of clean energy.

The Philippine coast guard accused its Chinese counterpart of “excessive and unlawful” actions in the disputed South China Sea. It said that China had fired water cannon at Philippine boats that were heading to resupply the country’s soldiers on the Spratly islands, parts of which are claimed by both countries (and others). China said the boats had trespassed; America denounced China’s response as “dangerous”.

Imran Khan, Pakistan’s former prime minister, spent the night in a high-security prison after receiving a three-year prison sentence for corruption. He vowed to appeal and called on supporters to protest, although so far the streets have been quiet. The ruling disqualifies Mr Khan, Pakistan’s most popular politician, from contesting national elections currently scheduled for November. In recent months Pakistan’s powerful generals have cracked down on Mr Khan and his party.

Elon Musk promised to cover any legal fees incurred by users of his social platform, X (formerly Twitter), who are “unfairly treated” by employers over their posts. The self-proclaimed “free-speech absolutist” has slashed X’s content moderation after buying the network last year. Mr Musk faces complaints from former employees at SpaceX and Tesla, his other companies, who claim they lost their jobs for criticising him.

Three weeks after its release “Barbie” passed $1bn in global box-office receipts, according to Warner Bros, the studio behind the movie. Greta Gerwig, the auteur who made the film, is the first solo female director to pass that threshold. Notably, “Barbie” did well in China, the world’s second-largest film market, despite a general loss of interest in Hollywood among audiences there. “Oppenheimer”, Barbie’s blockbuster rival, has raked in $552m.

Figure of the day: $140,000, the salary needed to comfortably afford to rent a studio apartment in New York. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
Saudi Arabia’s crude calculus
Saudi Aramco announces its second-quarter results on Monday. The world’s biggest oil company made a record profit in 2022 as oil prices spiked after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. By comparison, this year might seem like something of a comedown. The profits of the Western oil majors, which released their earnings last week, slumped in the second quarter compared with the same period in 2022.

But if the Saudi government has its way, Aramco may have a decent year after all. The company’s largest shareholder determines its output. The kingdom is eager to ensure that oil prices—and therefore revenues—stay high enough to finance its grand domestic economic plans. Last week Saudi Arabia’s energy ministry said it would extend oil-production cuts of 1m barrels a day until the end of September, adding that it may even consider “deepening” the cuts. The manoeuvres may be working: the price of Brent crude has climbed to around $85 a barrel in recent weeks.


PHOTO: AP
A fourth Trump indictment?
In 2016 Donald Trump said he could stand in the middle of Fifth Avenue and shoot somebody without losing any voters. It seems he was on to something. With three criminal indictments in the bag, America’s former president remains the frontrunner in the race to win the Republican primary. Both his lead in the polls and his campaign donations seem to have been boosted by the charges.

A fourth indictment could come as early as Monday. Last week Fani Willis, the steely Democratic district attorney in Fulton County, Georgia, announced that she had completed her investigation into Mr Trump’s attempt to overthrow the 2020 presidential election in the state, which he lost to Joe Biden. Her case will probably focus on a recorded phone call in which Mr Trump asked Georgia’s secretary of state to “find” 11,000 more Republican votes, and on fraudulent paperwork that a slate of fake Republican electors submitted to Congress. Her aim will be to show that the Trump administration orchestrated a multi-pronged attack.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Crunch time for Sri Lanka
A crucial week begins for Sri Lanka. The country has been stuck in a debt crisis for more than a year, ever since the government declared its coffers empty. To ensure a bail-out worth billions of dollars from the IMF, the government has until Friday to clinch a deal with the country’s banks on how to restructure its domestic debt. But the banks that hold that debt worry that deep reductions in its value could destabilise the sector.

The IMF has been the developing world’s emergency lender for nearly 50 years. But as public debts have spiralled, a number of countries with upcoming repayments are seeking help elsewhere. On August 1st Egypt borrowed $616m from the Arab Monetary Fund, the financial arm of the Arab League, on top of its $3bn rescue package agreed with the IMF in December. On August 4th Argentina borrowed $775m from Qatar to repay the fund. If Sri Lanka’s IMF deal falls through, it may look further afield, too.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Brazil fights for the Amazon
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Brazil’s president, has promised to save the Amazon rainforest. Since the start of his term in January, deforestation has dropped by one-third (it jumped 56% under his predecessor, Jair Bolsonaro). Now Lula, as he is known, wants to draw Brazil’s neighbours into the fight. On Monday he will host the leaders of eight of them in Belém, a port city, to prepare a joint strategy to be presented at COP28, an international climate-change conference, at the end of the year.

Lula’s summit will serve as a rehearsal for his address to the UN General Assembly in September, which is expected to focus on the environment. He also hopes to create a so-called Amazonian parliament, where delegates from the eight countries will discuss measures to stop deforestation. Still, Brazil’s call to arms seems at odds with some of Lula’s domestic policies. In May his government launched a programme of car subsidies, and it is conducting studies to exploit oil near the mouth of the Amazon river.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The UN rethinks neurotechnology
Neurotechnology has been around since the 1960s, albeit sometimes merely on the pages of sci-fi works. But recent improvements in artificial intelligence have provided fresh impetus, offering new ways to analyse the complex patterns of activity in the human brain. In June Neuralink, a company that hopes to use brain implants to treat paralysis, blindness and Alzheimer’s, received approval to begin clinical trials on humans. Its owner, Elon Musk, hopes the technology will eventually allow humanity to achieve “symbiosis” with AI.

Such designs have raised privacy concerns. In July UNESCO said that AI had put neurotechnology “on steroids”. It estimated that private investment in the sector had grown more than 20 times in the decade from 2010, and called for more regulation. On Monday experts from the UN’s human-rights body, OHCHR, will meet for a week-long session to discuss the surveillance risks that come with the technology. Do not expect any concrete steps just yet. Doing starts by thinking.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which song, named after a supposed martyr, was the anthem of the Nazi party?

Stone tools are fossilized human behaviour.

Louis Leakey
