The world in brief
July 21, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Russia attacked Ukraine’s Black Sea ports for a third consecutive night and declared that all ships bound for them would be considered “potential carriers of military cargo”. The price of wheat, much of which is grown in Ukraine, jumped after the announcement. On Monday Russia withdrew from a deal that had allowed Ukraine to export grain through the Black Sea. American officials warned that Russia may attack civilian ships and then blame Ukrainian forces. Some 18 people were wounded in Russian strikes on the port city of Mykolaiv. Attacks on infrastructure in Odessa continued.

Iraq expelled Sweden’s ambassador hours after a mob stormed the country’s embassy in the Iraqi capital of Baghdad. The government also suspended the working permit of Ericsson, a Swedish telecoms giant, as reported by local media. Demonstrators in Iraq objected to the Swedish police’s authorisation of a march in Stockholm during which organisers had planned to burn a copy of the Koran.

Supporters of Alexei Navalny said that Russian prosecutors had asked a court to sentence the opposition politician to an additional 20 years’ imprisonment. Mr Navalny is fending off extremism and other criminal charges in a closed-door trial at the penal colony where he is already serving sentences adding up to more than 11 years; a verdict on these additional counts is due on August 4th.

A group of Beijing-linked hackers accessed the unclassified emails of America’s ambassador to China and another senior State Department official, according to the Wall Street Journal. The cyber-attack, which compromised hundreds of thousands of emails, also affected the inbox of Gina Raimondo, America’s commerce secretary, government officials said last week. Hackers exploited a flaw, apparently since fixed, in Microsoft’s cloud-computing software.

Senior doctors in Britain began a 48-hour strike, their first in a decade. On Monday the British Medical Association, a union, rejected the government’s offer of a 6% pay rise, saying it was still a real-terms wage cut. This strike follows a five-day walkout by junior doctors, which ended on Tuesday. An estimated 600,000 appointments have been affected by recent strike action.

Frans Timmermans, the EU’s climate chief, announced that he would step down and return to politics in his native Netherlands. Mr Timmermans, who is in charge of the European Green Deal and leads the EU’s climate negotiations, will run on a combined Labour and Green Left ticket in an election in November. The current prime minister, Mark Rutte, is quitting politics after his government collapsed in June.

Several people were shot, and possibly killed, by police during protests in Kenya, according to the Kenya Human Rights Commission, an NGO. Hundreds of people gathered across the country on Wednesday to protest against the rising cost of living. The demonstrations—which are set to last until Friday—were called by the opposition after William Ruto, the president, introduced new taxes in June.

Figure of the day: 777,000, the number of IVF babies born in 2018. Read the full story.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Russia’s slow economic rebound
When the rouble collapsed after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine last February, the Russian central bank swiftly doubled interest rates. The ploy worked, raising confidence in the banking system and the currency. Over the subsequent months the bank cut rates. But it looks likely to raise them once again on Friday, from 7.5% to 8%.

The decision in part reflects Russia’s strong economic growth. The government is running a large budget deficit, adding to overall demand and thus domestically generated inflation. In part, though, the central bank is also trying once again to bolster the rouble. Western sanctions have made it more difficult for Russia to export goods—the current account was in deficit in June—while capital flight is rising, as rich Russians pull money out of the country. That is putting pressure on the currency, making imports more expensive. Russia has come a long way from the chaos of February 2022, but it is still weak.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Pressure piles on the Bank of Japan
For decades policymakers in Japan grappled with deflation, which they believe is holding back economic growth. But over the past year they have faced the opposite trend. Data due on Friday will probably show that the annual inflation rate remained around 3.2% in June, the highest in almost a decade. That would mean that inflation has exceeded the Bank of Japan’s target of 2% for the 15th consecutive month.

But the central bank, which meets next week to set interest rates, has not yet budged from its ultra-loose monetary policy. The BoJ believes the surge in prices, which has been driven by soaring food and electricity costs, is temporary. Ueda Kazuo, the BoJ’s recently appointed governor, has stressed the need for patience, saying he will only consider tightening when price increases are caused by domestic demand and higher wage growth. That may be some while yet. After adjusting for inflation wages in May fell by 1.2%—the 14th straight monthly decline.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Algeria’s bid to join the BRICS
Abdelmadjid Tebboune, Algeria’s president, will leave China on Friday with a smile on his face. During his five-day state visit he has clinched words of support from Xi Jinping, China’s president, for his country’s aspiration to join the BRICS, a forum for emerging powers that want to grow. The bloc, made up of Brazil, Russia, India, China and, since 2010, South Africa, is set to discuss bringing new countries into the fold at a summit in August.

Among the BRICS it is not just China, which is Algeria’s largest trading partner, that approves of Mr Tebboune’s ambitions. Last month he met Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, and secured similar assurances. But Algeria’s manoeuvres worry Western observers. The country is Africa’s largest natural-gas exporter; since the invasion of Ukraine Europe has lapped up Algerian gas to replace fuels from Russia. Mr Tebboune reckons that building stronger ties with the BRICS would help diversify and boost Algeria’s sclerotic economy. He is not the only one who thinks so: 21 other countries have already submitted bids to join.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
American Marines learn from Ukraine
For days US Marine Corps units have used paintball munitions to fend off enemies and complete landings on the beaches of the Japanese island of Okinawa. The American soldiers have also assembled cheap robots to deliver ammunition and to remove wounded soldiers from minefields, welding the machines together from pieces of steel, snowmobile tracks, garage-door motors, solar panels and 3D-printed parts. If the tactics sound familiar, it is because the exercise, which wraps up on Friday, has been inspired by Ukraine’s scrappy resistance.

With such drills the Department of Defence wants to instil Ukraine’s wartime resourcefulness in American soldiers. In Ukraine, for example, clandestine workshops are 3D-printing the cases for “candy bombs” into which explosives and ball bearings are packed. Some of the makeshift munitions, which are dropped by drones, can pierce armour. The Pentagon is expected to test its own candy bombs at a weapons range in Hawaii.


PHOTO: UNIVERSAL PICTURES
“Oppenheimer” drops into cinemas
Christopher Nolan’s new biopic of Robert Oppenheimer, the “father of the atomic bomb”, opens with the physicist staring into a puddle. The gloomy mood holds for the remainder of the film, which its director has likened to a horror flick.

As a student, Oppenheimer (played by an Irish actor, Cillian Murphy) was troubled by “visions of a hidden universe”. Having created the nuclear weapon which in 1945 was used to raze the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, he was appalled by his bomb’s effects. The film shows him hallucinating people vomiting, with peeling skin or charred flesh—symptoms of radiation sickness.

After the second world war, Oppenheimer lobbied for nuclear arms control. But, as the film shows, his views were unpopular while America was engaged in a cold war with the Soviet Union. Oppenheimer was ostracised. Today there are 12,500 nuclear weapons in the world and the threat of one being used is ever present.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which South American capital city was originally known as “Ciudad de Los Reyes”?

Thursday: Which branch of the armed services is often referred to in Britain as the “senior service”?

You’re only given a little spark of madness. You mustn’t lose it.

Robin Williams
