The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 13, 2023

Turkish officials said that they had issued more than 110 arrest warrants for architects, contractors and engineers connected with buildings that collapsed in devastating earthquakes on February 6th. The government has been widely blamed for not enforcing construction standards. Meanwhile, unrest in the south of the country disrupted rescue efforts. The death toll in Turkey and neighbouring Syria has now passed 33,000.

America shot down yet another unidentified object on Sunday, this time over Lake Huron, near the border with Canada. It was the third such incident in North American airspace in as many days, and came after a Chinese spy balloon was downed on February 4th. Earlier America’s government said that it was too early to characterise the two objects shot down on Friday and Saturday.

The party of Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor, looked set for a stinging defeat in elections for Berlin’s state parliament. His centre-left Social Democrats, who currently govern Germany’s capital in a coalition, took just 18.5% of the vote according to provisional results, compared with 27.5% for the conservative Christian Democratic party. The elections were a re-run of a nullified vote in 2021.

Israel’s president warned that his country risks “constitutional and social collapse” should the government ram through its controversial reforms to weaken the judiciary. Isaac Herzog, whose post is largely ceremonial, urged compromise in a primetime speech. Separately, Israel retroactively authorised nine settler outposts in the occupied West Bank, the first such move since Binyamin Netanyahu reclaimed the premiership.

Nikos Christodoulides won Cyprus’s presidency in a run-off election on Sunday. The former foreign minister once served in the ruling right-wing government, but ran as an independent candidate. Mr Christodoulides now must try to make good on his campaign promises, which included restarting stalled talks about reunifying the ethnically divided island and overhauling its energy infrastructure.

A spokesman for France’s government said that it was open to making concessions on its plan to raise the retirement age by two years. The proposal has been met with a wave of strikes and protests, with around a million people demonstrating across the country on Saturday. Unions have said that they will escalate action unless the plan is scrapped.

American-football fans tuned in to the Super Bowl, between the Kansas City Chiefs and the Philadelphia Eagles in Phoenix, Arizona. For the first time both starting quarterbacks are black: Philadelphia’s Jalen Hurts and Kansas City’s Patrick Mahomes. And it is the first such championship to be held in a state where sports betting is legal. Punters are expected to bet a total of around $16bn.

Fact of the day: 37%, the amount of women in Saudi Arabia with a job or looking for one. In 2017 it was 17%. Read the full story.

Turkey’s corrupt construction in the spotlight

By Sunday, Turkish officials had issued at least 110 arrest warrants for architects, engineers and contractors they claim are responsible for buildings that collapsed during catastrophic earthquakes on February 6th. More warrants are expected in the next few days as the death toll, now higher than 33,000 in Turkey and in neighbouring Syria, spirals upward.

Many believe that the government is pointing the finger in the wrong direction. Although Turkey has strict building codes meant to protect against quakes, corruption and bad policymaking mean that they are poorly enforced. Analysts say that much of the blame lies with the governments of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his predecessors and with municipal politicians.

The construction industry is riddled with weak links. The companies tasked with carrying out inspections to make sure standards are met are often paid by developers. Mr Erdogan’s government has also passed a series of amnesties, which allow illegal properties to be registered in exchange for a fine.The agency that carried out the most recent amnesty, in 2018, found that more than half of the country’s housing stock was not up to scratch.

America, Japan and South Korea seek to co-operate

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Senior officials from America, Japan and South Korea meet in Washington, DC on Monday. They hope to boost security co-operation in the face of threats from North Korea and China. America has long wanted to work more closely with its two key east Asian allies, but tensions over Japan’s colonial history in South Korea have hampered efforts thus far. Dialogue among the three countries has picked up in the past year following the election of Yoon Suk-yeol, a conservative, as president of South Korea. Three-way military exercises, which had halted in 2017, resumed in 2022.

But the past still presents a barrier to preparing for the future. In 2018 South Korea’s Supreme Court upheld rulings ordering Japanese firms to compensate South Koreans forced to work in factories during the second world war. Japan, which considers such claims settled through a treaty signed in 1965, was aghast. Efforts to negotiate a settlement have not yet borne fruit.

A shakeup of Biden’s economic team

PHOTO: REUTERS
President Joe Biden’s top economic adviser is expected to step down in the coming days. The departure of Brian Deese, director of the National Economic Council, is part of a wider turnover in White House staff at the two-year mark of Mr Biden’s presidency. Mr Deese played an important role in pushing the administration towards a bold economic strategy—an approach that brought legislative victories but also helped cause high inflation.

Mr Deese advocated a giant stimulus package in early 2021 to counter the economic slowdown induced by the pandemic. He also helped to craft the Inflation Reduction Act, a big climate-investment bill that passed last year. His successor is yet to be named. Reports indicate that the leading candidates are Wally Adeyemo, deputy secretary of the Treasury, and Lael Brainard, vice chair of the Federal Reserve. Whoever takes the job will have their hands full trying to implement Mr Deese’s designs.

Giorgia Meloni’s first ballot box test

Results are expected on Monday from regional elections in Lombardy, which includes Milan, and Lazio, which takes in Rome. The vote—in which almost a quarter of Italian voters can participate—is the first test of electoral support for the right-wing coalition led by Giorgia Meloni, the prime minister. Few observers doubt that her alliance will do well. The lack of suspense appears to have depressed turnout. By the end of the morning on Sunday it was less than 9%, compared with almost 20% at the last comparable elections.

The right is predicted to hold Lombardy, which it has governed for almost 30 years. Polls also suggest that it will snatch Lazio from a divided left. The biggest unknown is whether a result that confirms increased support for Ms Meloni’s Brothers of Italy (FdI) party will exacerbate tensions with her coalition partners, the Northern League and Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia party. The poll ratings of both have been reduced to single digits by FdI’s success.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Please note, the way we choose winners has changed. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which NFL team played its home matches at Shea Stadium in Queens, New York, before moving to East Rutherford, New Jersey?

We can afford no liberties with liberty itself.

Robert H. Jackson
