The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (21:47 GMT+1 / 04:47 Hong Kong)

Around 100 people were detained in Russia after participating in protests against the new mobilisation plans, said OVD-Info, a Russian rights group. Anti-war groups called for demonstrations in response to an address by Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, announcing “partial mobilisation”. Around 300,000 reservists will be conscripted, said Sergei Shoigu, the defence minister. On Wednesday flights out of Russia sold rapidly and internet searches for “how to leave Russia” skyrocketed.

America’s Federal Reserve raised its benchmark interest rate by 0.75 percentage points for the third time in a row. The central bank’s campaign to tame stubbornly high inflation has raised short-term interest rates from 0% in early March to 3% today, a sharp tightening of monetary policy not seen in four decades. Lowering inflation is the “number one job”, said Christopher Waller, a Fed governor, this month.

In an address to the UN General Assembly in New York President Joe Biden condemned Russia's invasion of Ukraine. The war must end on “just terms”, he said, and Russia was “the only country standing in the way”. Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, is slated to speak in the afternoon. Vladimir Putin, Russia’s leader, will not attend, but his foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, will deliver a speech on Saturday.

Donald Trump was sued for fraud by Letitia James, New York's attorney-general. The lawsuit, which also charges three of Mr Trump’s adult children and other associates, claims that the family’s firm, the Trump Organisation, misrepresented its property holdings to obtain favourable loans and tax benefits, and to reduce its tax obligation. The civil suit seeks at least $250m in damages.

Russia released ten foreign prisoners of war captured while fighting in Ukraine, including a British man who had been sentenced to death. The negotiations were mediated by Saudi Arabia’s crown prince and de facto ruler, Muhammad bin Salman, who has remained close to Moscow despite pressure from the West. The rest of the group is made up of four other Britons, two Americans, a Moroccan, a Croatian and a Swedish national, the Saudi foreign ministry said.

The death toll from Iran’s protests rose to at least seven. Authorities blamed protesters for the death of a member of the police force, while human-rights groups said that protesters had been killed by security forces. Rallies have been taking place since the funeral of Mahsa Amini, a young Kurdish woman, who died while in the custody of morality police. An internet blackout has been reported in Iran’s Kurdish region, while access to Instagram has been restricted across the country.

Germany finalised a deal to nationalise Uniper, the country’s biggest natural-gas importer. Under the “stabilisation package”, the federal government will inject €8bn into the firm, which has been hit hard by the recent turmoil in energy markets. The government is also in talks with two other gas suppliers about potential takeovers as it seeks to avert an energy crisis.

Fact of the day: 66,000 yuan ($9,500), the amount that a grocer in China was fined for selling subpar celery. Read the full story.

Putin's desperate measures

PHOTO: AP
For months President Vladimir Putin reassured the Russian people that his “special military operation” in Ukraine was going to plan. But on Wednesday he announced a “partial mobilisation”, meaning that Russians with army experience or in the reserves may be conscripted.

The announcement projects desperation. Sergei Shoigu, the defence minister, claims fewer than 6,000 soldiers have died in Ukraine. But he also said that 300,000 more would be mobilised. That would be a larger force than that which first invaded Ukraine in February.

Mr Putin promised draftees “additional military training”. But many of the officers who could deliver training are dead, wounded or already on the front lines. And mobilisation is unpopular. On Tuesday night internet searches for “how to leave Russia” skyrocketed. As Russia discovered in 1917, when the Bolshevik revolution toppled the monarchy, giving arms to people who do not wish to fight can be risky.

Iranians rage over a young woman’s death

PHOTO: PRESS ASSOCIATION
Iran has seen almost a week of protests since the death in custody of Mahsa Amini, a young woman whose “crime” was her clothing. Ms Amini was detained in Tehran by the morality police earlier this month supposedly for wearing a loose hijab, or headscarf. Police claim she suffered a heart attack. But witnesses say she was badly beaten. Her death set off demonstrations across the country. Some women have burned their headscarves.

Compulsory wearing of the hijab is a pillar of Iran’s theocratic regime. Relax the dress code, religious leaders’ thinking goes, and unwanted ideas may follow. Ebrahim Raisi, the arch-conservative president who was elected last year, has given his goons a freer hand to enforce dress codes. Police will crack down harshly on protesters (activists say they have already killed five). The unrest comes amid surging inflation, a stalemate in nuclear talks with the West and rumours about the supreme leader’s health. Many Iranians were primed to explode. Ms Amini’s death was a spark.

The case against Imran Khan

PHOTO: EPA
On Thursday Pakistan’s high court is expected to indict Imran Khan on contempt of court. The move is related to the former prime minister’s claim that a judge knew that one of Mr Khan’s aides had been tortured in police custody, but refused to release him. A different court last week ruled that Mr Khan could not be charged with the more serious offence of terrorism. But the lesser charge still carries risks.

If Mr Khan is found guilty, he could be barred from politics for five years. He therefore accuses his opponents of using the law against him. He may have a point. Since losing office after a parliamentary confidence vote in April his antics, and those of his supporters, have been a headache for his successor, Shehbaz Sharif. Mr Khan has exploited Mr Sharif's struggles with Pakistan’s economy and the fallout from devastating floods to boost his own popularity. That will not end in court.

A horrific year in the Sahel

PHOTO: AFP
Discussion of the Sahel, a strip of land on the southern border of the Sahara desert, will take place at the UN on Thursday. It will be a grim conversation. Jihadists affiliated with al-Qaeda and Islamic State have made it the world’s terrorism hotspot. Last year the region accounted for one-third of all terrorism deaths. So far, this year appears worse yet.

To tackle the jihadists, the military junta that rules Mali brought in Russian mercenaries from the Wagner Group. France, which had previously led the fight, then pulled its troops out. Wagner-linked massacres of civilians are spiralling. The UN’s peacekeeping force remains, for now. Some 3,600 people have been killed in Mali already, almost double the total for the whole of last year.

In Burkina Faso, meanwhile, in January soldiers seized power in a coup, promising better security. Yet this year will be Burkina’s deadliest ever. Niger, a democracy, is having a better year than its neighbours but even there more than 700 people have been killed so far.


Natural disasters on screen

PHOTO: SASIDIS SASISAKULPORN
The trailer for “Thai Cave Rescue” promises “heroic stories…you haven’t heard about”. The six-part television series, released on Netflix on Thursday, dramatises the rescue of 12 boys trapped in a cave in 2018. It seems unlikely that many viewers will be unfamiliar with the tale. When unexpected rainfall caused the Wild Boars football team to become stuck for 17 days in northern Thailand, their plight was broadcast around the world. The event has since been memorialised in two other films and a documentary.

The saga combines an audience-winning formula of high stakes, heroics and a happy ending. But plucky tales of survival may seem out of touch when disasters caused by extreme weather are increasingly frequent. Climate change is making rainfall more erratic, and flooding more common. In the past month alone, flooding in Pakistan has killed 1,400 people and displaced 33m. Those victims are unlikely to receive the Hollywood treatment.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which carrycot for babies is named after a Biblical figure?

Wednesday: Which politicians led the Labour party to disastrous defeat in the 1983 British general election?

I hope to go into a poem sober and come out a little drunk.

Dannie Abse