The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 2 hours ago (23:28 GMT+1 / 06:28 Hong Kong)

Crowds gathered outside Buckingham Palace and tributes poured in from foreign leaders after the death of Queen Elizabeth II on Thursday. The queen died, aged 96, at Balmoral Castle in Scotland. Britain’s oldest and longest-reigning monarch acceded to the throne in 1952 and led Britain, and the Commonwealth, through a period of intense change. Prince Philip, her husband of 73 years, died in April 2021. Her funeral will take place in ten days’ time.

The queen’s eldest son, Charles, has succeeded her as monarch. In a statement King Charles III, who is due to address the country on Friday evening, said his mother's death was a “moment of the greatest sadness”, and that the royal family would be “comforted and sustained” by its “knowledge of the respect and deep affection” in which the queen was held. Liz Truss, whom the queen appointed as prime minister only two days ago, called Elizabeth “the rock on which modern Britain was built.”

The European Central Bank raised interest rates by 0.75 percentage points for the first time on record, in an effort to curb soaring prices. Annual inflation in the euro area reached 9.1% in August, the highest ever, and continues to be driven up by the rising cost of energy and food. The ECB also revised its inflation expectations upwards.

EY, one of the Big Four accounting firms, said it would spin off its fast-growing consultancy practice from the unfashionable audit side of the business. The break-up is intended partly to resolve conflicts of interest between the two. Approval must first come from the firm’s 13,000 partners, who can expect big payouts from a split. EY’s boss said the consulting business will aim to raise $11bn by floating a 15% stake.

America’s Department of Justice said it would appeal against a judge’s order to appoint an independent arbiter to review documents seized from Donald Trump’s estate in Florida. The former president had requested the review, claiming the material was covered by executive privilege and should therefore be withheld from investigators looking into his handling of classified material.

Steve Bannon, a former aide to Mr Trump, turned himself in to face fraud charges in a New York court. The state-level prosecution closely follows a federal indictment from 2020 when Mr Bannon was accused of pocketing over $1m from a fundraising campaign to build a wall along the US-Mexico border. That indictment was terminated when Mr Trump pardoned Mr Bannon.

Ms Truss unveiled a plan to help with Britain’s soaring energy costs. The default tariff rate that most pay will be capped at £2,500 ($1,730) for two years, saving an average household about £1,000 a year compared with expected costs. Businesses will be supported for six months. Ms Truss claimed that her scheme would curb inflation by up to 5%. The government has also lifted a ban on fracking for gas.

Fact of the day: 20%, the amount by which the dollar has climbed over the past year. Read the full story.

The queen’s death: what happens now

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
For years the days following the death of Queen Elizabeth II have been subject to meticulous planning, under the codename “London Bridge”. According to the plan there will be ten days of mourning between the queen’s death and funeral, during which most official business will be suspended. Parliament is to be dissolved immediately, as are the devolved legislatures in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

The queen’s successor, King Charles III, will broadcast to the nation. In two days he will embark on a tour of his new kingdom. His mother, Elizabeth, will lie in state in Westminster Hall for three days, during which time thousands are expected to file past her coffin. The new king will only be crowned months later.

Elizabeth’s impossible act to follow

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Crowned on June 2nd 1953, Queen Elizabeth was Britain’s longest-serving monarch. The first of her 15 prime ministers was Winston Churchill; the last, Liz Truss, was sworn in just a few days ago. Elizabeth presided over an era of dramatic change in her country’s fortunes. Having acceded to the throne of a fading empire, she leaves behind a fissiparous, barely united kingdom. Yet she maintained a dignified silence through it all, as the constitution demanded. Only rarely did she hint at her own views; over the referendum in 2014 on Scottish independence, for instance, warning her subjects to “think very carefully” before voting.

The troughs of her reign were often caused by familial impropriety: the miserable marriage of Charles and Diana; the involvement of Prince Andrew in a transatlantic sex scandal. That the monarchy as an institution remained so popular was mostly down to Elizabeth’s personal example of duty and self-discipline, qualities less obvious in many family members. Queen Elizabeth II will be an almost impossible act to follow. Nonetheless, according to the line of succession, Charles has now become king.

China’s problem is not inflation

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ask an investor to name the world’s most pressing economic problem, and many would say inflation. But that concern is largely absent from the world’s second biggest economy. Figures released on Friday are likely to show that China’s consumer-price inflation in August remained below the government’s ceiling of 3%, and may even have stopped rising.

Although the price of pork, a key economic indicator in China, is much higher than a year earlier, fuel costs have peaked. And price pressure elsewhere in the economy remains subdued. The unremitting threat of lockdowns in response to covid-19 outbreaks is depressing confidence and spending. The debt distress of China’s property developers is undermining home sales, which is only deepening the distress. Even exports, which have propped up China’s growth this year, have slowed sharply. China does not have the world’s inflation problem, but it has a world of problems all of its own.

Tackling Europe’s energy crisis

PHOTO: DPA
Another crisis, another emergency European Union meeting. On Friday it is the turn of national energy ministers. Europe is grappling with mind-boggling fuel prices. Economy-wide spending on gas and electricity could balloon from €200bn ($199bn) before the crisis to €1,400bn, or almost 10% of EU-wide GDP, over the next 12 months. Policymakers need to find ways to help households and businesses through an expensive winter, and to do so in a co-ordinated fashion, since gas and electricity markets across the continent are linked.

The ministers will discuss proposals by the European Commission, the EU’s executive arm, to try to reduce peak electricity demand during morning and evening hours. The hope is to bring prices down, and to redistribute to consumers excess profits made by power, oil, and gas businesses. But ministers face a dilemma. The less they meddle with prices, the stronger the incentives for households and firms to cut back on energy use. But clawing back profits to help hard-hit consumers is justified, too.

Musk v Twitter

PHOTO: REUTERS
Elon Musk’s bid for Twitter smacked of recklessness and mercuriality from the off. Witness his baiting of the social-media firm’s board to his U-turn in July, when he sued Twitter to exit the purchase agreement. His argument that the company had misrepresented the extent of its spam accounts seemed, to many, a flimsy excuse to abandon a deal on which he had simply soured. In May Mr Musk texted one of his bankers that the bid “wouldn’t make sense…if we’re heading into world war three”, referring to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

But August brought a fillip to Mr Musk’s case. Twitter’s former security chief, Peiter Zatko, filed a whistleblower complaint alleging lax data privacy at the company, as well as bots aplenty. On Friday Mr Musk’s lawyers will question Mr Zatko under oath. Twitter, however, alleges that Mr Musk wanted out because he feared overpaying. Mr Musk will have to prove that bots amounted to a “material adverse effect” on the business—a high legal bar. The trial proper starts on October 17th.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which vehicle, first introduced at the New York World’s Fair in 1964, is Ford’s longest-produced car brand?

Thursday: What is the term for the smallest unit of information in a computer?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Yumi Arim, Tokyo, Japan
North America: Corien Kershey, Ottawa, Canada
Central and South America: Sebastian Agudelo-Restrepo, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic
Europe: Sven Nilsson, Copenhagen, Denmark
Africa: Paul Leigh, Pretoria, South Africa
Oceania: Roberta MacDonald, Runaway Bay, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Rosetta Stone, Rwanda, toxic and empire. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

We can know only that we know nothing. And that is the highest degree of human wisdom.

Leo Tolstoy
