The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (00:05 GMT+1 / 07:05 Hong Kong)

Turkey said Ukraine and Russia will sign a deal on Friday in Istanbul to resume grain exports from Ukraine’s Black Sea ports. Brokered by the UN and Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, the agreement would unblock about 18m tonnes of Ukrainian grain awaiting export. Russia’s blockade of Ukraine’s ports has sent global food prices surging and exacerbated world hunger.

Italy’s president dissolved parliament following the resignation of Mario Draghi, the prime minister, and called for elections within 70 days. Mr Draghi will remain in a caretaker capacity until then. He stepped down on Thursday after three parties in his coalition sat out a vote of confidence in his government on Wednesday. He won the vote 95-38, but it was a hollow victory: there are 321 senators.

Snap’s share price fell by more than one-quarter in post-session trading after the social-media firm delivered dismal second-quarter results. Revenues increased by 13%, to $1.1bn, from the same period last year. But Snap’s net loss widened to $422m, an increase of 178%. The firm declined to provide forecasts for future results, saying “forward-looking visibility remains incredibly challenging”. It added that it would “substantially” slow hiring.

America’s Supreme Court temporarily refused to reinstate the Biden administration’s policy of limiting arrests of illegal immigrants. In September the Department of Homeland Security told immigration agents to prioritise the detention of recent border-crossers and those who threaten national security. Louisiana and Texas sued to reverse the rule, and won in a lower court. The Supreme Court will hear a full challenge on the merits of the case in December.

The European Central Bank raised interest rates by 0.5 percentage points on Thursday, its first increase in 11 years. The bank also approved a new bond-buying programme to try to avert a fresh euro-zone debt crisis. The rise was higher than the ECB’s pre-announced plan, which proposed an increase of 0.25 percentage points.

Amazon said it would buy 1Life Healthcare, an American health-care company, for $3.9bn. 1Life operates One Medical, a membership primary-care service that offers both in-person and virtual appointments. Since 2019 Amazon has had some success in the medical market with its Amazon Care offering. But an earlier joint venture with JPMorgan Chase and Berkshire Hathaway, called Haven, failed.

American Airlines reported record quarterly revenues of $13.4bn. The company announced net income of $476m. When adjusted for one-off events, that made for its first quarterly profit since the start of the covid-19 pandemic. Despite a summer surge in traveller numbers, challenges remain for the airline, including staffing shortages. The carrier predicted a profitable third quarter nonetheless.

Fact of the day: three, the number of days each year that the average European has experienced temperatures above 38°C over the past five years. Read the full article.

Russia’s long economic war

Any good general understands the importance of morale in a protracted conflict. So does Russia’s central bank. After the invasion of Ukraine in February, the bank acted decisively to show it was in control, doubling interest rates to 20% to save the rouble. As the currency stabilised, since then it has brought rates back down to 9.5%, in four large cuts. On Friday another, more modest cut, of 0.5 percentage points, is expected.

While much of the world is raising rates amid soaring prices, Russia can get away with easing. That is because after the initial shock of sanctions, high energy prices have buoyed the economy. The rouble has strengthened against the dollar, helped by a ban on taking money out of the country.

Inflation is slowing, too. That, though, is partly because Russians are buying less as Western goods disappear from the shelves. Eventually the stun-gunned economy will become less productive, real incomes will fall, and Russia’s central bankers will have to work harder to rally the troops.


Twitter’s limbo earnings

PHOTO: AP
Twitter’s results, due on Friday, are expected to be mixed. But regardless of what they say, investors’ minds will be elsewhere. They will be focused on the social-media platform’s messy legal dispute with Elon Musk, the billionaire who tried to buy the firm before changing his mind.

Twitter’s product, user numbers and revenues have long been disappointing. But Mr Musk’s expression of interest in buying the firm in April plunged Twitter into chaos. Staff revolted at the idea of working for a plutocrat. The promise of a $44bn payout for shareholders kept things moving. But earlier this month Mr Musk rescinded his offer.

Twitter is now in the unenviable position of trying to force a reluctant buyer to seal the deal. Its lawsuit against Mr Musk is off to a good start: despite his attempts to delay the trial until next year, a judge has ordered a hearing for October. In arguing against the delay Twitter’s lawyers said that the protracted uncertainty “inflicts harm on Twitter every hour of every day”.

Trump plays kingmaker in Arizona

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Donald Trump considers Blake Masters, a venture capitalist, to be “a great modern-day thinker!” On Friday the former president will host a rally in Arizona alongside Mr Masters, who hopes to secure the Republican nomination for the upcoming Senate contest in the November mid-term elections. Together they will set out their plans to “save America”, as Friday’s rally is called.

Republicans aim to take the Senate at the mid-terms, and Arizona is one of the few competitive seats up for grabs. With Mr Trump’s backing, Mr Masters has a good chance of winning the GOP primary on August 2nd. Four-fifths of Republican candidates endorsed by Mr Trump in open primary contests have won their party’s nomination. But Mr Masters may fare less well in the general election. He recently claimed black people are responsible for gun violence and obliquely endorsed the so-called “great replacement theory”, warning that Democrats were aiming to “change the demographics of our country”. Polling suggests Mr Masters would lose to Mark Kelly, the Democratic incumbent, in November. Mr Trump may once again be leading his party astray.

A Tory summer roadshow

PHOTO:
Friday marks the first day of summer recess for Britain’s parliament. It returns on September 5th, the day the country will also learn the name of their new prime minister.

On Wednesday Conservative MPs finished whittling down a longlist of contenders to replace Boris Johnson as the leader of their party to two: Rishi Sunak, the former chancellor, and Liz Truss, the foreign secretary. Both claim to be Thatcherites, but they are split on fiscal policy. She wants big tax cuts now, whereas he insists they must wait until inflation is tamed. They differ in style, too. Ms Truss is not a fluent public speaker while Mr Sunak is polished, albeit sometimes prickly. Their campaigns have kicked into gear: on Thursday, the candidates tried to win over Conservative councillors at a private event in London.

It is now up to the Conservative Party’s roughly 180,000 members to pick a winner. In an attempt to woo them Mr Sunak and Ms Truss will now spend the summer traipsing up and down the country for 12 hustings. The tour will kick off in Leeds—Ms Truss’ hometown—on July 28th. She is currently the favourite, and that might give her another advantage.

Follow the Conservative Party leadership contest with our interactive tracker

“Nope” is a maybe

PHOTO: AP
Jordan Peele, the writer and director of “Us” and “Get Out”—which earned him an Oscar for best original screenplay—has made another comedy-drama with a very short title: “Nope”, released in America on Friday.

Daniel Kaluuya and Keke Palmer star as siblings who spot a flying saucer. Desperate for money, they set about becoming the first people to take an irrefutable photograph of an alien spaceship. Despite that simple premise the film is the most wide-ranging of Mr Peele’s oeuvre. “Nope” is sprinkled with interludes concerning the Wild West, animal training, child stars, social media and the erasure of black people from Hollywood history—all of which are shot beautifully by cinematographer Hoyte van Hoytema, of “Interstellar” and “Dunkirk”.

The result is intriguing, if sometimes rambling. Mr Peele struggles to weave everything together. But he is the rare Hollywood filmmaker who has too many ideas, rather than not enough.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which rock festival was the subject of a song written by Joni Mitchell?

Thursday: Which 1950s American sitcom was voted the best TV show of all time in a 2012 poll?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Anand Mahajan, Mumbai, India

North America: Leslie Appiah, Denver, United States

Europe: Laura Sedman, Vienna, Austria

Africa: Lasse Herdien, Cape Town, South Africa

Oceania: Orson Passi, Canberra, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Pope Francis, Panama, rhino and secret. There were no entries from Central or South America. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Life isn't a matter of milestones, but of moments.

Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy
