The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (00:26 GMT+1 / 07:26 Hong Kong)

A bipartisan group of American senators agreed a deal on gun control. The proposal will provide resources to states to help keep guns away from people deemed to be dangerous. It will also increase funding of mental-health services and make it harder for people under 21 to buy guns. With the support of ten Republicans, the proposal should be able to get through the Senate. President Joe Biden said the deal could have gone further, but that it reflects “important steps in the right direction”.

China’s defence minister, Wei Fenghe, told America to “stop smearing and containing China”, claiming that it was up to America to improve the countries’ relationship. At the Shangri-La security meeting in Singapore, Mr Wei had previously said China would “not hesitate to start a war” if anyone tried to split Taiwan from the mainland. Lloyd Austin, his American counterpart, accused China of taking a “more coercive and aggressive approach to its territorial claims”.

Russian forces destroyed a bridge linking Severodonetsk to another city in eastern Ukraine, severing a vital evacuation path for civilians. The last remaining bridge out of the city is also under heavy shelling, a Ukrainian official said. Severodonetsk has become the epicentre of the war in recent days with both sides suffering heavy losses, including a former British army officer who was shot dead on Friday while fighting with the Ukrainian army.

Exit polls in France put President Emmanuel Macron’s centrist alliance neck-and-neck with a new left-wing coalition after the first round of voting in legislative elections. Both Mr Macron’s Ensemble and Jean-Luc Mélenchon’s New Ecological and Social Popular Union received about 25% of the vote, followed by the nationalist-populist National Rally, led by Marine Le Pen, with 19%. The second round takes place on June 19th.

Britain ordered a review into its retail fuel market. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, said the investigation would focus on why petrol prices had risen so quickly but had been slow to come down. The average cost of filling a family car in Britain recently rose above £100 ($123) for the first time. Consumers globally face mounting costs at the pump. The average petrol price in America has reached $5 per gallon, the highest ever.

Police in India struggled to contain growing religious unrest across the country. Muslims have protested against anti-Islamic remarks made by members of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party about Muhammad the Prophet. Two teenagers have been killed in clashes. Some governments, including Qatar and Saudi Arabia, have demanded apologies over the comments.

Authorities in Argentina grounded a Venezuelan cargo plane amid suspicions that the aircraft had entered the country under false pretences. The Boeing 747, which until recently had belonged to an Iranian airline, was seized at a Buenos Aires airport and its crew detained. The incident occurred during the visit of Nicolas Maduro, Venezuela’s president, to Iran. The two countries, both grappling with American sanctions, signed a 20-year cooperation deal.

Fact of the day: 1,000, the number of images produced by a bot for this week’s cover of The Economist. Read the full story.

The ceaseless battle for Donbas

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The week begins with attention on Severodonetsk, a city which marks the eastern edge of a Ukrainian-held pocket that Russia seeks to collapse. The war in Ukraine has become a brutal slugfest. Russian artillery is pounding Ukrainian positions in the eastern Donbas region, inflicting heavy casualties. Ukraine’s deputy head of military intelligence has warned that his army is nearly out of artillery ammunition, with guns chewing through as many as 6,000 rounds a day. Russia had ten times as much artillery, he said, and Western arms are slow to arrive.

Russia now holds all residential areas in Severodonetsk. But Ukraine’s army is holding out in the Azot industrial zone. “Let me give you my professional opinion,” declared the mayor of Kramatorsk, a major industrial city in the pocket, to the New Yorker one week ago. “If we don’t get heavy weapons in two or three weeks, we’re fucked.”

China’s “zero covid” policy 2.0

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Beijing and Shanghai find themselves testbeds for a new version of China’s “dynamic zero-covid” campaign. Authorities have imposed rolling micro-lockdowns on China’s two most important cities, backed by mass testing for tens of millions of residents. Rather than the economically calamitous citywide lockdowns seen previously, Beijing and Shanghai are experimenting with targeted campaigns to find and quarantine individual positive cases and their close contacts within hours.

Calibration is proving hard. Days after Beijing reopened bars and restaurants, over 100 infections were traced to a single bar in the city centre, triggering quarantine for thousands of people and the sealing of neighbourhoods and even individual buildings for up to 14 days. Bars closed again. Many Beijing schools scrapped plans to reopen on Monday. Shanghai, which ended a two-month lockdown on June 1st, ordered most of its 25m residents into mass-testing after an outbreak at a hair salon. Welcome to the new normal.

Yet more Brexit negotiations

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Monday the British government will propose a draft bill giving it unilateral power to change the Northern Ireland protocol, part of the Brexit treaty it agreed with the EU. To avoid a hard border with Ireland, the protocol keeps Northern Ireland in the EU single market for goods. But that means customs checks between Great Britain and the province. The government wants to scrap these, but the EU refuses to rewrite a treaty that Boris Johnson signed only two years ago.

The government hopes to negotiate changes to the protocol with the EU, but thinks the proposed law will strengthen its hand. It also wants the Democratic Unionist Party, which refuses to rejoin the power-sharing executive in Northern Ireland until the protocol is scrapped, to change its mind. Parliament may not approve the law anyway, since many Conservative MPs and peers are opposed. The likeliest outcome will just be more rows with the EU.

Costa Rica comes under cyberattack

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Costa Rica is so peaceful that it is one of a handful of countries that has no army. Yet the Central American country is under a state of emergency as it grapples with a wave of attacks—of the cyber sort.

Some 29 institutions have come under assault since hackers first struck in mid-April. Customs officials have been forced to use paper, hospitals have not been able to access patient records and teachers have gone unpaid. Treasury systems, including an online tax-filing portal, are expected to go back online on Monday. But given that the government has refused to pay the ransoms demanded by the hackers, more attacks seem likely. The identity of the cyber-attackers is unclear, although they are using ransomware from Conti and Hive, gangs based in Russia.

Latin America appears to have become a testing ground for such crime. Peru has been hit, too. Costa Rica may be a target simply because it is an easy one. Like many other countries, it needs to invest in its defences.

Golf’s civil war

No one takes to golf because they find it exciting. But fans of the sport begin the week beholding a spectacle none can have imagined: a breakaway league that threatens to bring civil war to this most genteel of games. Last week 48 players competed in Britain in the first of eight LIV Golf tournaments, a series lavishly funded by the Saudi sovereign-wealth fund. Those who play on the PGA Tour, which organises tournaments in America, were immediately blacklisted.

So far the game’s superstars, such as Rory McIlroy and—despite a rumoured offer of $1bn—Tiger Woods have shunned the Saudi schism. (The LIV opener was won by Charl Schwartzel, currently ranked world #126.) But other PGA players, most notably Phil Mickelson, have found the lure of Saudi cash impossible to resist, despite “sportswashing” accusations that they are helping launder the reputation of a murderous autocracy. More may follow, as LIV moves to America later this month. The rupture will overshadow this week’s US Open—and perhaps the future of golf itself.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Which Hollywood star’s last appearance was in “The Killers” in 1964, shortly before he started a new career?

Better a man honour his profession than be honoured by it.

Jean Eugene Robert-Houdin
