The world in brief
August 29, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Shares in Evergrande, a heavily indebted Chinese property developer, plunged by nearly 90% after they again began trading in Hong Kong, following a 17-month ban. Earlier the firm reported a loss of 33bn yuan ($4.5bn) in the first six months of 2023—roughly half as much as in the same period last year. Evergrande, which defaulted in 2021, has been badly hit by the crisis in China’s property sector.

The overall amount of money in the euro zone has shrunk for the first time since 2010, according to data released by the European Central Bank. The contraction in money supply—which includes cash, deposits and loans—is the result of interest-rate rises put in place to tackle inflation. The hikes have discouraged lending in the private sector and seen short-term deposits decline.

A judge set Donald Trump’s federal election-interference trial to begin on March 4th, 2024. The former president’s legal team had requested it start April 2026. Mr Trump’s calendar is filling up: his hush-money payments trial in New York is set for March 25th (though that could change), and his classified-documents trial is due to start in May. Mr Trump denies all charges.

In a defiant address Emmanuel Macron, France’s President, said that the French ambassador remained in Niger, despite the military junta there demanding on Friday that he leave within 48 hours. Niger’s president was ousted in a coup on July 26th. France, the country’s former colonial power, says it supports efforts by neighbouring governments—including possible military action—to reinstate him.

The United Nations argued that climate change poses a direct threat to children’s rights. On Monday the UN’s Committee on the Rights of the Child published new guidance saying that countries are legally obligated to protect children from the harmful consequences of environmental degradation. That obligation extends to “regulating business enterprises” and allowing children to take their governments to court, it said.

Protests broke out in Tripoli, the capital of Libya, after Israel’s foreign minister announced that he had held an informal meeting with his Libyan counterpart. Libya is a staunch supporter of Palestine and refuses to recognise Israel. The Speaker’s Office in Libya’s parliament accused the foreign minister of “grand treason”. The prime minister then suspended her.

Calls for the British Museum to give back Chinese artefacts spread across Weibo. People took to the Chinese social-media platform after an editorial—published on Sunday in the Global Times, a nationalist newspaper—demanded the return of antiquities “free of charge”. The British Museum has been embroiled in controversy since news broke last week that scores of objects had been stolen from it.

Figure of the day: $12bn, the amount Amazon will blow on streaming content this year. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The state of China’s travel industry
China’s “big three” airlines will post results this week, giving an indication of how the country’s mammoth travel industry is faring after the pandemic. First up will be China Southern on Tuesday, followed by Air China and China Eastern a day later.

Like all Chinese airlines, the trio have endured a period of adversity. China was slow to end pandemic-related restrictions on travel; it did so only at the end of 2022. And China’s economy has grown at a listless pace this year.

Travel is picking up, but slowly. The number of passengers taking domestic flights returned to 88% of their pre-pandemic levels in the first half of 2023, according to China’s Civil Aviation Administration, and has even surpassed those levels in recent months. But the number flying to previously-popular destinations in South East Asia has been much slower to recover. Tourist-dependent businesses in that region are still struggling.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Costa Rica’s president meets Biden
President Joe Biden will meet Rodrigo Chaves, his Costa Rican counterpart, on Tuesday. The leaders are expected to discuss migration. An increasing number of people from South America are passing through Costa Rica on their way to America. Both countries want to make this migration more orderly.

The other agenda item, China, will be a thornier issue. America is concerned that the scope of China’s relationships with countries in the region is moving beyond trade and investment to security. Costa Rica has an especially long history of working with China. In 2007 it became the first country in Latin America to end diplomatic recognition of Taiwan, a Chinese demand. (Costa Rica’s neighbours have followed suit.) But Costa Rica is also wary of the risks of getting too close to China. One goal of Mr Chaves’s trip to Washington will be to assure Mr Biden of that.


PHOTO: MARCIN NOWAK/LNP
London expands its controversial congestion charge
From Tuesday more motorists must pay to drive in London. The Ultra-Low Emissions Zone—in which a surcharge applies to high-polluting vehicles—will be expanded to all 32 boroughs of Britain’s capital. The £12.50-per-day levy will cover diesel cars and vans that do not meet “Euro 6” standards (typically those bought before 2015), and cars that don’t meet “Euro 4” (which typically predate 2006). A scrappage scheme has been introduced to help non-compliant car owners buy greener vehicles.

The mayor, Sadiq Khan, a member of the Labour Party, argues that the move will improve health, especially of children. But it has provoked a fierce backlash, particularly among drivers who live in peripheral parts of the city. That has been seized upon by the ruling Conservative Party, which has had a hard time winning votes in London in recent years. The party is now portraying Labour as anti-driver. Some vigilantes have vandalised the cameras used to enforce the scheme.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Sending a strong message to America’s far-right
Enrique Tarrio was not in Washington, DC on January 6th 2021. The former leader of the Proud Boys, a white supremacist brotherhood, had been arrested two days before the group stormed the capital. But in May a jury found him responsible for organising the Proud Boys’ effort to block Congress from certifying the results of the presidential election. He and several other members were convicted of seditious conspiracy (plotting to overthrow the government).

On Tuesday federal prosecutors will ask a judge to sentence Mr Tarrio to 33 years in prison. That would be far longer than the already substantial 18 years that Stewart Rhodes, the leader of the Oath Keepers, another far-right group present at the insurrection, received for the same charges.

The severity of the sentence probably reflects the fact that the Proud Boys have remained active since January 6th, even as other far-right groups have grown quieter. Such a long imprisonment for its figurehead may prove a powerful deterrent for the remaining members.


PHOTO: REUTERS
When a loss might be a win for English football
Today’s top footballers are overworked, playing more games than ever before. That will not tug many fans’ heartstrings—most would love to be paid millions to kick a ball around—but it is a serious problem. Tired footballers are more prone to injury.

On Tuesday England’s League Cup enters its second round, which is when Premier League teams join in. Many of those are barely interested in it. England is unusual in holding two domestic cup competitions. The League Cup has far less prestige than the FA Cup, its older brother. Premier League sides, and many others, often field second-tier players for fear of losing their best to injury or fatigue.

The obvious solution is to scrap the trophy. But that would ignore the principle that apparently guides the game’s bureaucrats: the volume of football must always increase, no matter the cost to players. Pep Guardiola, Manchester City’s manager, said that if teams like his did not participate in the League Cup, the game’s bosses would find another way to keep them just as busy.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which business magazine was founded by Henry Luce in 1929?

Monday: What is the name of the Royal Air Force’s aerobatic display team?

Sophistry is only fit to make men more conceited in their ignorance.

John Locke
