The world in brief
July 31, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The Economic Community of West African States agreed to place economic sanctions on Niger’s new military government, which took power in a coup on Wednesday, and gave it one week to cede power. Separately the African Union gave the coup leaders 15 days to return to barracks and restore civilian government. Pro-coup demonstrators in the capital, Niamey, burned French flags and chanted anti-French and pro-Russian slogans.

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, said that attacks on Russian territory were an “inevitable” progression of the conflict with Russia. The comments came after three Ukrainian drones were downed during an attack on Moscow that briefly shut one of the city’s airports. Meanwhile Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, said that he does not reject the African proposal for peace presented at the Russia-Africa summit, but that attacks by Ukraine would make a ceasefire “virtually impossible”.

Pope Francis called on Russia to rejoin the Black Sea grain deal, which ensured safe passage for crops and fertiliser shipped from Ukraine. The price of wheat has shot up since Russia pulled out of the arrangement on July 17th. Ukraine’s economy will suffer if it cannot export its crops. Russia is also bombing its ports and grain stores.

Denmark’s foreign minister, Lars Lokke Rasmussen, said his government will consider legally restricting the burning of the Koran during protests. Doing so insults Muslims and has caused diplomatic rows, but cannot currently be prevented in Denmark due to rules protecting free speech. The burning of Korans in Sweden this year jeopardised the country’s application to join NATO.

In Pakistan an explosion at a rally held by the Islamist Jamiat Ulema e Islam party killed at least 40 people. The meeting in Khar, in the country’s north-west, was attended by supporters of Maulana Fazal ur Rehman, the hardline cleric who leads the JUI, which is a member of Pakistan’s ruling coalition. Nobody has yet claimed responsibility for the blast.

Italy’s defence minister, Guido Crosetto, said in an interview published in Corriere della Sera that joining China’s Belt and Road Initiative was an “atrocious” decision which has not increased Italian exports. Italy is the only Western country to have signed up to China’s programme of infrastructure projects. The country’s prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, has given her government until December to decide whether to leave the BRI.

The Central African Republic held a referendum that would enable Faustin-Archange Touadéra, the president, to rule for life. Mr Touadéra, who was first elected in 2016, has proposed a new constitution that would abolish the two-term limit. Opposition parties have called for a boycott of the vote, which will be partly overseen by Wagner troops.

Figure of the day: £12.50 ($16), the cost per day of driving a polluting vehicle in London. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Modi faces questions over an ethnic conflict
India’s ruling party, the Bharatiya Janata Party, justifies its muscular style of governance as a way of ensuring stability. Yet over the past three months the credibility of that claim has been undermined by a brutal ethnic conflict in Manipur, a small northeastern state run by the BJP. At least 150 people have died and thousands displaced in a flare-up of long-running tensions between the state’s majority-Hindu Meitei community and its Christian hill tribes.

Opposition parties accuse Narendra Modi, the prime minister, of “brazen indifference” to the conflict. A delegation from a newly-formed opposition alliance visited the state over the weekend and flagged the “pathetic condition” of relief camps. The alliance has filed a no-confidence motion against Mr Modi’s government. A date for a vote on it will be fixed on Monday. The vote is unlikely to shake the BJP, which has a huge majority in parliament. But it will force a debate about the violence. That scrutiny, the opposition hopes, could both help Manipur and dent the BJP’s reputation further.


PHOTO: AP
China’s economic zigzags
At a meeting of China’s 24-person Politburo on July 24th China’s leaders acknowledged that the economy’s recovery this year has encountered “twists and turns”. Growth was faster than expected in the first three months of the year but slower than hoped thereafter. Exports have suffered from the global economic slowdown and geopolitical tensions. A recovery in the property market after China abandoned its zero-covid policy has quickly petered out. And deflationary pressures are building.

Investors will be hoping that the official purchasing managers’ indices for June, released on Monday, will reveal another, happier twist in China’s economic fortunes. Perhaps they will show that service industries, which have been relatively buoyant since China’s reopening, have begun to lift other parts of the economy. If they instead show the opposite—continued weakness in manufacturing and a slowdown in services—then China’s leaders will have to twist and turn more sharply towards stimulus.



PHOTO: AP
Republican fundraising revealed
Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor, who is seeking the Republican nomination for president, raised an impressive-sounding $20m between April and June. But that news belies an ominous reality. Mr DeSantis is reliant on big donors. But individual contributions are capped, and his campaign burns through cash. To cut costs, he has sacked a third of his staff. Donor enthusiasm appears to be sagging. After two DeSantis fundraisers in the well-heeled Hamptons in New York were reportedly cancelled because of underwhelming interest, a Republican fundraiser sniffed to the New York Post that George Santos, a disgraced congressman, “could’ve pulled off a better…swing”.

On Monday candidates’ political action committees—which are distinct from their principal campaign funds—will report how much they made and spent in the first half of 2023. Donald Trump, who has raised more than Mr DeSantis, can boast of many donors who give small amounts, a sign of grassroots enthusiasm. But those who gave to his PAC may not realise that more than $40m was spent on his legal fees in the first six months of the year.


PHOTO: AP
Europe’s growth problem
As so often, the euro zone’s economy is in a tight spot. Last week the European Central Bank raised its benchmark interest rate to 3.75%, matching a record high set in 2001. Yet inflation is proving stubborn, and July’s figures—due on Monday—are unlikely to show much improvement. Economists expect core prices (which exclude volatile food and energy prices) to have risen by 5.4% year on year, compared with 5.5% in June.

The good news is that this is partly because the bloc has so far avoided a recession that, until recently, looked inevitable. An upbeat set of national growth figures last week has led forecasters to predict that second-quarter euro-zone GDP growth, also due on Monday, will be 0.2%. The bad news is that Germany’s output remained flat between March and June, after two consecutive quarters of contraction. Until Europe’s biggest economy starts growing again, the continent’s best hope is to muddle along.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Saudi football juggernaut
Last week a Saudi Arabian football club, Al-Hilal, offered to pay €300m ($330m), a world record, for Kylian Mbappé, a forward who captains the French national team. His club, Paris Saint-Germain, accepted the offer, not least because Mr Mbappé has declined to sign a new deal with them. But Mr Mbappé, who is just 24, does not seem keen to move to Saudi. Al-Hilal had hoped to entice him with a €200m-a-year salary, which would have made him the best-paid player in the world, ever.

These huge sums are further evidence of Saudi Arabia’s determination to become a footballing powerhouse. The country has already spent €220m on dozens of players from European clubs this summer. The government says it wants to encourage growth of its non-oil economy and promote sport among its citizens. Cynics have suggested that it wants to distract people from human-rights abuses. If Mr Mbappé moves, other European clubs will worry that their top talents will be tempted to join him.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Oscar Wilde wrote that “I can resist everything except” what?

Never trust anything that can think for itself if you can’t see where it keeps its brain.

J.K. Rowling
