The world in brief
September 18, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission’s president, promised that the EU would draw up an action plan to help Italy cope with a sudden influx of migrants. More than 7,000 people have arrived at the Italian island of Lampedusa in recent days; nearly 115,000 migrants reached Italy by sea during the first eight months of 2023. On Sunday Mrs von der Leyen visited Lampedusa, where Giorgia Meloni, Italy’s far-right prime minister, has declared a state of emergency.

America’s national security adviser and China’s foreign minister held “candid, substantive and constructive” talks in Malta this weekend, according to officials on both sides. The two powers have recently made several attempts to improve their fractious relationship. There is speculation that these may culminate in a rare meeting between Joe Biden and Xi Jinping, the American and Chinese presidents, later this year.

Russia claimed it had repelled a Ukrainian attack on Crimea on Sunday, but that Ukrainian drones had disrupted air traffic in Moscow and caused a fire at an oil depot elsewhere. Earlier, the first civilian ships to use a new “humanitarian corridor” to transport grain reached Ukrainian ports. Ukraine introduced the route after Russia backed out of a deal in July that had allowed its neighbour to export crops and fertiliser.

The UN thinks that at least 11,300 people have now died after catastrophic flooding in Derna, a coastal city in Libya. It reckons that some 10,000 are still missing—leaving almost a quarter of the city’s population either dead or unaccounted for. Storm Daniel, which made landfall in Libya on September 10th, appears to be the deadliest cyclone worldwide since 2008.

Ahead of the UN General Assembly in New York, Brazil insisted that wealthy countries should finance the energy transition worldwide. Alexandre Silveira, Brazil’s energy minister, said that poor countries could not afford to overhaul their infrastructure. He also argued that rich countries will rely on poorer countries as sources of green energy—such as biofuels, of which Brazil is the largest producer after America.

The simultaneous strikes organised by the United Auto Workers, a huge American union, entered their third day on Sunday—with no hint of an imminent resolution. Nearly 13,000 workers have downed tools at the plants of three carmaking giants: Ford, General Motors and Stellantis. The UAW wants a 36% pay rise over four years; the companies have offered 20-21%. The union’s president called progress “slow”.

German climate activists sprayed paint over the Brandenburg Gate, one of Berlin’s best-known landmarks. The group, called the “Last Generation”, wants Germany to stop using coal, oil and natural gas by 2030. The country currently intends to reach net-zero emissions by 2045, but has repeatedly missed its annual targets. Two German states are reportedly considering whether to classify the Last Generation as a criminal organisation.

Figure of the day: 2.6m, the number of Britons not working because of long-term sickness. Read the full story.


PHOTO: ALAMY
India’s mysterious parliament session
India’s parliament begins a five-day special session on Monday. Ostensibly, the unusual sitting is meant to commemorate 75 years of parliament and to celebrate its move to a newly constructed building. But opposition politicians believe something more dramatic is afoot. Narendra Modi, the prime minister, has a habit of springing new policies on Indians. His Bharatiya Janata Party-led government has only released an agenda for the first day of the session, but has demanded that all its MPs attend.

Amid frenzied speculation, two possibilities are popular. One is that the session will be used to change the country’s English name from “India” to “Bharat” (a transliteration of its Hindi name). The other is that the BJP will reorganise the electoral calendar, to make India’s carousel of state and federal elections take place simultaneously every five years. But, given Mr Modi’s history, Indians will not be too shocked if the session is about something else entirely.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Georgia defendants hoping for a courtroom change
On Monday a judge will hear an attempt by one of the 19 people accused of election interference in Georgia to move his racketeering trial from a state court to a federal one. (Three more defendants will make similar attempts on Wednesday.) In August Donald Trump and his acolytes were accused of plotting to overturn the 2020 presidential election in the state. Five requested a new venue, including Jeffrey Clark, a former justice department official and the subject of Monday’s hearing.

In Georgia state jurors are drawn from Democratic-leaning Fulton County. Federal jurors, meanwhile, come from ten counties, some of which are more conservative. To secure a switch—and, they hope, a friendlier jury—defendants must prove they were acting as government officials, rather than political operatives, when the events they were indicted for occurred. That looks increasingly tricky. Mark Meadows, Mr Trump’s former chief of staff, had his request rejected last week. His case was presumed to be the strongest.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ukraine’s forces get bogged down
There was excitement in July and August when, as part of its vaunted counter-offensive, Ukraine’s army began pushing through Russian lines in the south of the country. A salient, or bulge, began developing around the village of Robotyne, with Ukraine putting pressure on the second of Russia’s three defensive lines.

But progress has since slowed after Russia redeployed chunks of its 76th division from the east to the south. There have been almost no changes around Robotyne in almost two weeks. Despite sporadic cases of Russian troops running out of ammunition and fleeing to lines further back, Russia is generally scraping together enough reserves to withstand the heavy, attritional fighting at the front. Ukrainian officials publicly insist that dwindling ammunition and trickier weather will not prevent them fighting into the coming weeks and even into late autumn. In private, though, both Ukrainian and Western officials acknowledge that a big breakthrough before winter is a long shot.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Clintons’ philanthropy conference returns
The Clinton Global Initiative, which starts in New York on Monday, will be a star-studded affair. Its cast of philanthropists includes Ajay Banga, the president of the World Bank, Michael J. Fox, an actor, and Pope Francis. They will discuss global issues like climate change and health equity. The theme, “keep going”, is a concept with which the CGI itself is familiar.

Launched in 2005, the event shut down during Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign amid questions about donors and conflicts of interest. But Bill Clinton revived it last year, saying its purpose had “never been more urgent”. This year it is tackling heat adaptation in cities, gender-based violence and forced migration. The Clintons will ask participants to turn their discussions into commitments, often with financial backing—they claim that pledges from previous events have already helped 435m people. “Keep going” is a plea for donors to add extra zeros, as well as a motivational slogan.


PHOTO: MARK SENIOR
“Rebecca” comes to London’s West End
From Monday, Londerners can go to Manderley again—a musical of “Rebecca”, Daphné du Maurier’s gothic novel, opens at Charing Cross Theatre. The show, originally written in German, first played in Austria in 2006. One of the writers obtained the musical rights, denied to others, by tracking down du Maurier’s son in Cornwall (also the setting for the fictional mansion of Manderley).

As a novel, “Rebecca” is legendary. Published in 1938, it was an instant bestseller and has never gone out of print. Its tale of the English aristocracy—and an outsider desperately trying to fit in—has been adapted for film, television and theatre. The musical alone has been performed in 12 countries and eight languages. But its English-language iterations have struggled. In 2012 a Broadway production was cancelled after several of its “investors” turned out to be fraudulent fabrications. Those backing the show in London must hope that the themes of greed and lies remain onstage.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: What is the name for the cavity in a shotgun into which the cartridge is inserted?

In order that all men may be taught to speak truth, it is necessary that all likewise should learn to hear it.

Samuel Johnson
