The world in brief
September 14, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Spain will send €1m ($1.07m) to Libya in “solidarity” with flood victims, the foreign minister announced. It is the latest country to pledge aid among the many providing money, food and medical supplies to the region after Storm Daniel caused severe flooding and burst two dams near Derna, a coastal city. Egypt, Tunisia and the UAE are among those who have sent rescue teams to the scene. Local officials said that more than 5,000 people have died. Some 10,000 are reported missing.

Shares in Arm, a British chipmaker, were priced at $51 each on Nasdaq, valuing the company at over $54bn. It is the firm’s first public offering since it was taken private by its owner SoftBank Group, a Japanese technology conglomerate, seven years ago. The blockbuster listing signals a revival of the IPO market and is one of the biggest so far this year.

Mitt Romney, the American senator for Utah, will not seek re-election in 2024. In a video posted on X, formerly Twitter, the 76-year-old Republican said it was time for “a new generation of leaders” and criticised both Joe Biden and Donald Trump’s stances on climate change, debt and dealing with Russia and China. His statement comes amid concerns from some American voters that their lawmakers are too old.

America’s annual inflation rate rose from 3.2% in July to 3.7% in August, slightly higher than expected. On a monthly basis the consumer price index went up by 0.6%, compared with 0.2% in July, while the “core” measure, which excludes food and energy, also rose by slightly more than predicted. Next week the Federal Reserve will decide whether to raise interest rates again to bring inflation closer to its target of 2%.

China became the first country to appoint a new ambassador to Afghanistan since the Taliban returned to power in August 2021. Zhao Xing was received at a ceremony at Afghanistan’s presidential palace in Kabul. No country, including China, formally recognises the Taliban regime, which enforces repressive rules restricting the freedom of women and girls.

The European Union will investigate Chinese state subsidies for electric vehicles, announced Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, during her annual “state of the union” speech. Mrs von der Leyen said cheap Chinese cars were “distorting our market”. State investment in China’s EV technology was around $100bn between 2009 and 2019; battery-powered vehicles account for a third of China’s exports.

Apple has been told to stop selling its iPhone 12 in France after tests carried out by the country’s radiation watchdog found that the model breached European limits on emissions of electromagnetic radiation. If the issue is not resolved through a software update the company could be ordered to recall phones which have already been sold. Apple is contesting the findings.

Figure of the day: €5 ($5.40), the new peak-time entrance fee for day-trippers to Venice, introduced to curb overtourism. Read the full story.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Arm’s highly anticipated IPO
Arm, a British chipmaker owned by SoftBank Group, a Japanese tech-investment powerhouse, was valued at over $54bn after it priced its initial public offering at $51 a share. It will start trading on Thursday. That valuation is well above the $40bn that Nvidia, an American chipmaker, offered in 2020. Some of Arm’s largest customers, including Apple and Google, have lined up to buy shares.

Arm’s return to public markets, seven years after it was taken private by SoftBank, is the biggest IPO so far this year. A successful sale will boost the prospects of other companies waiting to float, including Instacart, an online grocery delivery company.

Arm’s public listing will also test if investors believe that the company will be as important for the artificial-intelligence economy as it was for the smartphone boom—99% of the world’s smartphones use Arm’s technology. The company’s reliance on China for a quarter of its revenue concerns some investors. Nevertheless expect demand to be high.


PHOTO: AP
Will the ECB raise rates again?
Inflation in the euro zone was 5.3% in August, well above the European Central Bank’s target of 2%. Reason, therefore, for hawks on Thursday to want to increase interest rates further. Even a small hike, of 0.25 percentage points, would take the deposit rate to a record high of 4%.

Yet doves at the ECB will try to get the bank to pause and reflect. Europe’s economy is heading for trouble. Retail sales and industrial production slowed in July. Construction firms are deeply pessimistic and the widely -watched IFO business- climate index from Germany showed deteriorating sentiment across all sectors in August. On Monday the European Commission cut its euro-zone growth forecasts for both 2023 and 2024 by 0.3 percentage points.

In part, these are the delayed effects of the ECB’s past rate increases. But in order to be steadfast in its fight against inflation, the hawks may prevail, for now, and raise rates one last time.



PHOTO: ALAMY
Striking times for America’s workers
On Thursday the United Auto Workers, one of America’s biggest unions, will decide whether to strike over a pay dispute with Ford, GM and Stellantis (whose biggest shareholder, Exor, also part-owns The Economist’s parent company). Recent disputes which ended with favourable terms have encouraged some in the labour movement. A tight job market has also given workers leverage. In July UPS, a delivery company, agreed to raise drivers’ pay by 17%.

If the UAW strike goes ahead, up to 146,000 members would walk out, adding to roughly 190,000 other workers, including actors and hotel staff, already on the picket line. More American private-sector employees would be on strike than at any time since the 1980s.

President Joe Biden has made unionisation easier to achieve and harder to block. But this wave of strikes could inflict damage on the economy. However much Mr Biden likes unions, it is less clear that he likes strikes.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
What to do if climate goals are missed
September marks the beginning of “climate season”, the run-up to the annual UN climate summit—this year COP 28, being held in November in Dubai. It brings a slew of reports. Last week the UN published the first “global stocktake”, a five-yearly exercise assessing progress towards targets in the Paris climate agreement to limit global warming to between 1.5°C and 2°C above pre-industrial temperatures. It found progress to be lacking and warned of a “rapidly narrowing window” to meet the 1.5°C goal.

Failing to meet that would constitute an “overshoot”; what to do in such an event is the main priority of the Climate Overshoot Commission, an independent group of eminent climate policymakers, which will publish its conclusions on Thursday. The commission will probably discuss how to remove warming gases from the atmosphere and the possible benefits of solar geoengineering, using a sunshade to block some incoming warming solar radiation. Both methods could help turn the global thermostat down, but the latter is considerably more controversial.


PHOTO: 20TH CENTURY STUDIOS
Poirot’s latest mystery
The most memorable thing about Kenneth Branagh’s first two Hercule Poirot films, “Murder on the Orient Express” (2017) and “Death on the Nile” (2022), was the extravagant double-decker moustache sported by their director-star. Both films were overshadowed by the superior 1970s adaptations of the same Agatha Christie novels, so it is sensible of Sir Kenneth and his screenwriter, Michael Green, to have picked a lesser known Christie book, “Hallowe’en Party” (1969), as the inspiration for their third Poirot whodunnit.

“A Haunting In Venice”, released in America and Britain on Friday, unfolds over a dark and stormy night in a crumbling Venetian palazzo, where the soon-to-be murder victims and suspects (Michelle Yeoh, Tina Fey, Kelly Reilly and Jamie Dornan) have gathered for a seance. Mr Branagh aims for horror-movie chills, but his film is merely sombre and grey rather than spine-tinglingly spooky. The mystery has a satisfying solution, but, Poirot’s moustache aside, none of it is hair-rising enough.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which character was played by John Boyega in the later Star Wars films?

Wednesday: What is the name for a mariner who guides ships into port?

The most dangerous worldview is the view of those who have never looked at the world.

Alexander von Humboldt
