The world in brief
June 18, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Blasts on the Kerch bridge that connects Crimea to Russia reportedly killed two people. Video footage on social media revealed significant damage to the bridge’s structure. A Ukrainian source told AFP, a news agency, that Ukraine’s security services and navy had carried out the attack using waterborne drones. Traffic has been stopped on the bridge, which is the only direct link between Russia and the peninsula that the Kremlin annexed from Ukraine in 2014.

Russia said that it would withdraw from the agreement that has allowed Ukraine to export grain through its Black Sea ports. The deal, which was initially brokered by the UN and Turkey in July 2022, has helped tame global food prices. A Kremlin spokesperson said that Russia would “return” to the deal if its own demands are met. Russia denied that the decision was linked to the attack on Kerch bridge.

An Alzheimer’s drug developed by Eli Lilly, an American pharmaceutical firm, was shown to limit cognitive decline in late-stage clinical trials. The findings suggested that donanemab, an antibody treatment, slowed progression of the disease in its early stages by around 35%. Eli Lilly said that it will submit the drug for FDA approval. A similar drug, lecanemab, achieved full approval this month.

Ford is slashing the price of its electric F-150 Lightning trucks by up to nearly $10,000, or between 6% and 17%. The carmaker has now twice reduced its electric-vehicle prices this year to stay competitive with Tesla. Tesla, meanwhile, sought approval to double the size of its plant in Brandenberg, Germany. If successful, the American EV-maker will operate the largest car factory in Germany.

More Wagner troops arrived in the Central African Republic, replacing some of the hundreds of fighters who left after the group’s short-lived mutiny in Russia. According to a CAR government spokesperson, they will oversee an upcoming constitutional referendum, which could allow the president, Faustin-Archange Touadéra, to run for a third term. Wagner has operated in the CAR since 2018.

President Joe Biden invited Binyamin Netanyahu to the White House in an attempt to amend frosty relations with the Israeli prime minister. Mr Biden has criticised Israeli settlement-building in the West Bank and Mr Netanyahu’s judicial reforms. No date was set for the visit; on Tuesday Mr Biden will host Israel’s president, whose role is largely ceremonial.

Swatch, a Swiss watchmaker, sued the Malaysian government for confiscating 172 of its LGBT-themed watches. Homosexuality is a crime in Malaysia. In May the government seized the rainbow-coloured watches from several shopping malls across the country. At the time Nick Hayek, Swatch’s boss, asked if the authorities would confiscate the “many natural rainbows” in Malaysia’s skies.

Figure of the day: 10%, the proportion of birth mothers in Spain that are over the age of 40. Maternal age shot up in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America shows South Korea its nuclear playbook
Credibility is crucial to America’s extended nuclear deterrent. Not only must the superpower dissuade enemies from trying anything, but it must convince allies that it will respond if they ever do. Fear does the first part. The second is a bit trickier.

Concern from South Korean hawks that America would not risk a North Korean nuclear strike on, say, Seattle to save Seoul have led to ever louder calls for an indigenous South Korean nuclear-bomb programme. America hopes that the first-ever meeting on Tuesday of the two allies’ new Nuclear Consultative Group will quieten them. Though it does not fundamentally change America’s nuclear posture, the NCG provides a forum for the two to engage in “nuclear and strategic planning”. For now, that seems to be enough for Yoon Suk-yeol, South Korea’s president. Speaking at South Korea’s Memorial Day on June 6th, he crowed that the two countries’ 70-year-old military partnership had been “upgraded to a nuclear-based alliance”.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The West takes on Russia’s sanction dodging
On Tuesday the Helsinki Commission, an American federal agency, holds a hearing on Switzerland’s role in helping Russia evade Western sanctions. Switzerland has long had a reputation for stashing away the assets of Russia’s kleptocrats: the HC estimates that Swiss banks hold more than $200bn in Russian cash. And in March four Swiss bankers were convicted in Zurich of failing to carry out full due diligence on transfers made by Sergei Roldugin, a Russian cellist and close confidant of Vladimir Putin.

But Switzerland is far from alone in frustrating Western efforts to enforce sanctions. The European Union’s latest measures targeted companies which help Russia to circumvent the bloc’s export controls. The entities in question came from countries including China, the United Arab Emirates and Uzbekistan. In May Josep Borrell, the EU’s top diplomat, criticised India for refining Russian crude oil and shipping it to the West. When it comes to trading with Russia, opportunities for middlemen abound.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Main street thrives, Wall Street suffers
Bank of America and Morgan Stanley, two of America’s largest banks, report second-quarter earnings on Tuesday; Goldman Sachs follows on Wednesday. The results are likely to show that Main Street—small businesses and households—are doing fine. As interest rates have climbed, the income that Main Street’s commercial banks, like BofA, earn on loans has soared too. Typically higher rates might also induce a recession, pushing up loan losses. But there is little sign of that yet. Defaults ticked up only a little at Citi, JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo, which reported on Friday.

It is a different story on Wall Street, where higher rates have dried up the flow of initial public offerings and merger deals. Market turbulence can help trading desks—but this, too, was absent in the second quarter. At JPMorgan investment-banking fees and trading revenues both fell on the year. That bodes ill for Goldman and Morgan Stanley, who have both been laying off staff.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America’s securocrats gather in Aspen
Much of America’s national-security establishment takes to the Colorado mountains on Tuesday to reflect on the geopolitical moment. Over the four-day Aspen Security Forum they will have a lot to ponder: the war in Ukraine and the diplomacy that might follow it; the power-struggles in the Kremlin exposed by Yevgeny Prigozhin’s brief revolt; and the deepening rivalry between America and China amid efforts to stabilise relations.

The conference tends to be an all-American talkfest. This time, however, a sizeable international contingent will be in Aspen, emulating the transatlantic feel of the Munich Security Conference. What Americans say and think still matters most but, increasingly, America relies on allies to counterbalance its foes.

Perhaps the biggest topic is not formally on the agenda: what will happen to America itself given the looming presidential-election re-match next year between Joe Biden and Donald Trump. Will America stay on its internationalist course, or deviate into a more vengeful and organised form of Trumpian populism?


PHOTO: LITTLE BROWN BOOK GROUP
Colson Whitehead’s “Crook Manifesto”
Colson Whitehead is the only author to win Pulitzer prizes for successive novels: his magnificent quasi-fantasy “The Underground Railroad” in 2017 and the overpraised “The Nickel Boys” three years later. “Crook Manifesto,” published on Tuesday, probably won’t get him a third, but it is still a hugely enjoyable work. It is his second to feature Ray Carney, a furniture-store owner and sometime fence, in Harlem, New York City, and it follows the same structure as the first, “Harlem Shuffle”, written in 2021.

In three linked crime stories set over the course of the 1970s—(“Harlem Shuffle” took place in the 60s)—Carney straddles Harlem’s workaday and criminal worlds. To his credit Mr Whitehead, unlike many writers, takes plot seriously; the stories are sinuous and lithe. The best of them is the second, about the ramshackle making of a film called “Nefertiti TNT.” But Mr Whitehead’s real subject is Harlem: its customs and mores, transients and anchors, and its meaning to those who call it home.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which is the most valuable ball in the game of snooker?

Monday: Nephritis is a disease associated with which organ?

Resentment is like drinking poison and then hoping it will kill your enemies.

Nelson Mandela
