The world in brief
August 24, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Yevgeny Prigozhin, the head of the mercenary Wagner Group, is reported by Russian state media to have been on the passenger list of a private jet that crashed near Moscow, killing all ten people aboard. Mr Prigozhin led an aborted mutiny in June, when Wagner troops briefly marched on the capital. He was then swiftly exiled to Belarus, and has barely been heard from since. But on Monday Mr Prigozhin released a video speech—his first in months—in which he boasted about Russia making Africa “even more free”.

India became the first country to land a spacecraft near the Moon’s south pole. The mission, known as Chandrayaan-3, put down its lander and is expected to dispatch a rover. India’s success contrasts with Russia’s woes: on Sunday its moonshot, Luna 25, crashed as it attempted to reach the same region. India is only the fourth country to reach the Moon, after America, China and the Soviet Union.

Rudy Giuliani, former personal lawyer to Donald Trump, surrendered to authorities, having reached a $150,000 bond agreement with prosecutors. He was indicted alongside the former president on sweeping racketeering charges. The 19 co-defendants have until Friday to surrender: six are thought to have done so already, with Mr Trump expected to join them on Thursday. Mr Giuliani and Mr Trump deny wrongdoing.

A Ukrainian drone attack killed three civilians in Belgorod, a region in southern Russia that borders Ukraine, according to its governor. Russia’s defence ministry also claimed to shoot down three drones attempting to attack Moscow. An American official said America does not endorse or facilitate Ukrainian attacks inside Russia, but noted that it is up to Ukraine to decide how to defend itself.

Alberto Núñez Feijóo, Spain’s leader of the opposition, will have the first chance to form a government in an investiture vote scheduled in parliament for late next month. Mr Feijóo’s centre-right People’s Party won the most parliamentary seats in a general election in July, but has so far failed to secure a majority, even with support from Vox, a hard-right party.

German business activity shrank at its fastest clip since May 2020 in August, according to preliminary data. The HCOB flash German composite purchasing managers’ index, which tracks the services and manufacturing sectors, fell to 44.7 from 48.5 in July, below analysts’ expectations. That bodes ill for hopes that growth in services could offset the ongoing downturn in manufacturing output.

Srettha Thavisin was sworn in as Thailand’s prime minister, as Thaksin Shinawatra—a former prime minister who founded Mr Srettha’s party—was hospitalised during his first night in jail. Mr Thaksin was arrested on corruption charges on Tuesday upon returning to Thailand after 15 years away. Speculation is rife that, under a deal with the military establishment, Mr Thaksin will soon receive a royal pardon.

Figure of the day: 19, the number of F-16s that Denmark has pledged to Ukraine. Read the full story.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Donald Trump faces the music, again
Donald Trump is expected to surrender at a jail in Atlanta on Thursday. He was indicted last week on 13 felony counts alleging that he schemed to overturn the 2020 election in Georgia. The former president’s lawyers have arranged for him to be released in exchange for a $200,000 bond that also orders him not to threaten witnesses or co-defendants ahead of his trial. Unlike the officials in charge of his other arraignments in Washington, Miami and New York City, the Fulton County sheriff plans to treat him like most other defendants by taking a mugshot.

The 18 alleged co-conspirators indicted alongside Mr Trump have been ordered to turn themselves in by Friday. John Eastman and Rudy Giuliani, two of his top former lawyers, have already done so, though both, like Mr Trump, deny wrongdoing.

The district attorney will not argue her case before a jury for months, or even years. But if Mr Trump lashes out on social media, violating his bond conditions, he could land himself in even more trouble sooner than that.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A new era for Turkey’s central bank
The monetary-policy committee of Turkey’s central bank, which on Thursday will set interest rates, has been transformed. Last month the country’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, replaced three of the committee’s five members, including supporters of his misguided economic policies, with respected economists. They will serve under Hafize Gaye Erkan, the bank’s governor since June. The ongoing overhaul has resulted in some welcome decisions, including raising interest rates by 2.5 percentage points to 17.5%, last month. But rectifying the damage from Mr Erdogan’s mismanagement—including rate cuts that propelled inflation to its highest level in two decades—will take much more.

The Turkish lira has plummeted by more than 25% against the dollar since May, largely because of a slowdown in the bank’s costly interventions in currency markets. That triggered another surge in inflation, to an annual rate of 48% in July, after falling for eight consecutive months. Still, economists polled by Reuters expect another cautious interest-rate rise of no more than 3.0 points.



PHOTO: AP
Fukushima water release
On Thursday Japan will begin releasing over 1m tonnes of treated radioactive water from the failed Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant into the Pacific Ocean. The water has been filtered but retains some tritium, a radioactive isotope—although only around 1,500 becquerels per litre, about seven times less than the World Health Organisation’s guidelines for drinking water. In July the International Atomic Energy Agency said the impact on humans and the environment would be “negligible”. Kishida Fumio, Japan’s prime minister, has repeatedly avowed the scheme’s safety. But many people are still up in arms.

Local fishermen fear more damage to the area’s reputation. The public has little trust in TEPCO, the plant’s owner, which has failed to dispel its reputation for cack-handed management since the reactors’ meltdowns in 2011. And China is accusing Japan of treating the ocean like its “private sewer”. The water release will probably take up to three decades; restoring trust in Japan’s nuclear industry may take even longer.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ukraine’s independence day
Ukraine celebrates its independence day on Thursday, its second since Russia invaded the country. Russian aggression has made the holiday, which commemorates Ukraine’s birth as a sovereign country in 1991, more important. In 2013 just 12% of Ukrainians said independence day was an important date for them. Now 63% do.

But slow progress in Ukraine’s counter-offensive and fears of renewed aerial attacks have soured the public mood. Cities like Kyiv, Poltava and Mykolaiv have banned mass gatherings. The main public acknowledgement will be an exhibition of destroyed Russian weaponry on Khreschatyk, the central thoroughfare in Kyiv, the capital.

On independence day last year a record number of air alerts sounded across the country as Russian bombers staged dummy air strikes. Real attacks are likely this year, according to Ukrainian military intelligence. “It could happen a day earlier, or a day later, or last several days,” said Vadym Skibitsky, the deputy commander. “I don’t think it can surprise any Ukrainian.”


PHOTO: EPA
A mystery at the British Museum
The British Museum has defended its right to keep artefacts by arguing that it looks after things well. A series of thefts has cast doubt on that claim. The museum says that objects dating as far back as the 15th century BC, including gold jewellery and gems, are “missing, stolen or damaged”. A staff member has been sacked. More details have been unearthed: Roman carved gems are said to be among the things taken. The Telegraph has reported that items were listed on eBay, an online auction site, at bargain prices.

Keeping tabs on 8m objects, just 1% of which are on display, is difficult. But sympathy for the museum is in short supply. People in countries where some of its objects originated have long claimed that it had no right to hold them. Some now say the museum is getting a taste of its own medicine.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which architect, renowned for his brutalist style, designed Coventry Cathedral?

Wednesday: Which American government agency has four production centres in Denver, Philadelphia, San Francisco and West Point?

Doubt is one of the names of intelligence.

Jorge Luis Borges
