The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 5, 2023

The stalemate in America’s House of Representatives continued as Kevin McCarthy lost a sixth ballot to become Speaker. Twenty rebel Republicans supported Byron Donalds, a second-term congressman. To win, any Republican contender can afford to lose just four Republican votes. Voting will continue until a Speaker is chosen. Earlier Donald Trump endorsed Mr McCarthy.

EU regulators judged that Meta broke European law by in effect compelling users of its social-media platforms such as Facebook and Instagram to accept personalised advertisements. The ruling includes a fine of €390m ($414m), but could prove far more costly for the American tech giant if it forces changes to its advertising model. The judgment is one of the most significant since the EU introduced new data-privacy laws in 2018.

Ukraine’s army-intelligence chief told ABC News, an American broadcaster, to expect strikes “deeper and deeper” into Russia. In December Ukraine carried out several drone attacks far into Russian territory. He added that fighting in the war would turn “hottest” in March. Earlier Russia blamed a Ukrainian missile attack that killed at least 89 Russian troops in eastern Ukraine on its own soldiers’ using mobile phones.

Though American inflation eased in the past few months, rate-setters at the Federal Reserve stressed that “substantially more evidence of progress” was needed before they halt interest-rate rises, according to minutes released on Wednesday from their December meeting. Separately, a survey of managers showed that American manufacturing activity contracted in December for a second consecutive month.

Stellantis inked a deal to help Archer Aviation, an American startup, manufacture a flying taxi. Archer plans to produce the electric aircraft—which it says will ferry five people 100 miles (160km) on a single charge—at an as-yet-unbuilt factory in Georgia in 2024. Archer has been backed by United Airlines, but this investment—of up to $150m—by a carmaker is unusual.

Inflation in France unexpectedly slowed in December, according to provisional figures, as energy prices eased. INSEE, the national statistics office, said annualised inflation fell from 7.1% in November to 6.7% in December; economists had expected a small rise. The figures provide more welcome economic news in the euro zone after a similar fall in German inflation for December was announced on Tuesday.

Europe continued to experience unseasonably balmy weather after at least eight countries recorded all-time temperature records for January. Temperatures in Poland beat the country’s previous record for the month by 0.3°C; beach-goers basked in around 25°C in Bilbao, the hottest-ever January day in the Spanish city. Scientists warn that climate change can cause extreme temperature patterns to intensify.

Fact of the day: 46%, the share of people in Britain saying that immigration has a positive effect on the country, up from around 35% in 2015. Read the full story.

Mounting tensions in Jerusalem

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A visit by Israel’s national-security minister to one of the world’s most contentious religious sites has highlighted the radical tendencies of Binyamin Netanyahu’s new government. On Tuesday Itamar Ben-Gvir, leader of an ultra-nationalist party in Mr Netanyahu’s coalition, visited Jerusalem’s Temple Mount, near the al-Aqsa mosque, despite warnings of violent protests. So far these have not materialised. But the visit, condemned by Arab regimes, has already postponed a trip by Mr Netanyahu to the United Arab Emirates that had been slated for next week.

Mr Ben-Gvir’s portfolio gives him control of police and a new paramilitary “national guard,” while other far-right ministers plan to expand the construction of settlements in the occupied West Bank. That risks further escalating tensions between Israelis and Palestinians. Mr Netanyahu, who is on trial for corruption, is now beholden to his firebrand partners and finding it difficult to rein them in.

Tech’s annual jamboree in Sin City

PHOTO: AFP
On Thursday the Consumer Electronics Show kicks off in Las Vegas. Some 100,000 people from over 170 countries are expected to take the opportunity to play with the latest gadgetry from more than 3,000 companies. As well as the usual launches of consumer-tech products, the glitzy event will see carmakers showcasing flashy new features. In 2022, GM and Mercedes-Benz announced innovations to their electric vehicles. One attraction this year will be a race around the Las Vegas Speedway between cars driven by artificial intelligence.

But the show comes at a rough time for the tech industry. Share prices were battered in 2022; the tech-heavy Nasdaq composite index fell by about one-quarter. Firms from Amazon to Zillow have announced layoffs. And 2023 offers little hope for a rebound: analysts forecast that 40 of the world’s 100 biggest technology firms will see revenues shrink. That is no mood for a party, even in Vegas.

North Korea’s nuclear weapons

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
North Korea started the year with a bang, testing a “super-large multiple rocket system”. Kim Jong Un, the country’s dictator, boasted that it could carry a nuclear payload to anywhere on the Korean peninsula. He also called for an “exponential increase” in North Korea’s nuclear arsenal.

This suggests that North Korea intends to spend 2023 as it did the previous year: testing new weapons and honing its ability to use them. South Korea and America’s stock response—issuing stern threats and matching North Korean muscle-flexing with reciprocal displays of force—is also unlikely to change. Far from de-escalating, Yoon Suk-yeul, South Korea’s president, has said the country should consider suspending a five-year-old agreement with North Korea that limits military exercises. Seventy years after the armistice that silenced the guns of the Korean war in 1953, the peninsula remains one of the most volatile places on Earth.

A death-penalty case in South Carolina

PHOTO: AP
Lethal injection can be a gruesome way to die. In America, where it is the main method of capital punishment, such executions are often botched. Drug manufacturers, wanting nothing to do with the practice, have largely stopped supplying the necessary ingredients. That has left some states scrambling for alternatives. In 2020 South Carolina joined Mississippi, Oklahoma and Utah in allowing executions by firing squad—a rare method used to execute only three people since 1976, all in Utah—when lethal injections are unavailable.

But Richard Moore, a death-row inmate faced with a choice between firing squad and South Carolina’s 110-year-old electric chair, argues that neither method is constitutional. On Thursday the state’s supreme court will consider whether he can be executed by firing squad. Whatever the court decides, such cases will only hasten a reconsidering of capital punishment in America altogether. Thirty-seven states have either abolished the death penalty or executed no prisoners in more than a decade. Capital punishment may be approaching its last gasp.


Dhaka Lit Fest is back

PHOTO: ALAMY
Since it began in 2011, the annual celebration of Bangladesh’s literary culture has faced some severe challenges. Most notably, in 2015 many speakers dropped out following a spate of attacks on secular writers by machete-wielding Islamists. Since then the avowedly secular festival has pitted itself as a defender of free speech in a publishing industry dominated by Islamic books and religious censorship.

After a three-year covid hiatus, on Thursday the festival returns with an impressive line-up. Abdulrazak Gurnah, a Nobel-prizewinning author and Tilda Swinton, a British actress, join acclaimed South Asian writers such as Shehan Karunatilaka, Amitav Ghosh, Saad Z. Hossain and Geetanjali Shree, who won the International Booker prize in 2022.

But organisers face a backlash against newly introduced ticket prices. And critics charge that the festival fails to address the government’s draconian censorship laws. Speaking out, though, risks the event, sponsored by the culture ministry, being cancelled for good.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which city in Oxfordshire, England, hosts an annual rowing regatta?

Wednesday: Which area of Los Angeles was stricken by violent riots in August 1965?

History is the sum total of things that could have been avoided.

Konrad Adenauer
