The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (01:08 GMT / 09:08 Hong Kong)

Diplomats from the EU agreed on a price cap for Russian oil of $60 per barrel, according to Poland’s ambassador. The policy aims to squeeze Russia’s revenue by prohibiting Western firms from insuring, shipping or trading Russian crude anywhere in the world unless it is sold below the cap. The G7 is expected to endorse the plan soon. Separately, an EU embargo on Russian crude takes effect on Monday.

Employers in America added more jobs than expected—263,000—to non-farm payrolls in November. A separate household survey showed that 186,000 people left the labour force, putting pressure on wages, which rose by 0.6% in November from the previous month. Strong hiring and pay growth are unlikely to deter the Federal Reserve from its highly telegraphed plan to ease interest-rate increases in December.

China began adjusting to what the country’s covid tsar, Sun Chunlan, called a “new stage” in the fight against the virus, after a wave of protests. Authorities in two major cities, Chengdu and Tianjin, announced a further easing of covid curbs. Meanwhile Kristalina Georgieva, head of the IMF, said China’s covid strategy would be “critical” in determining Asia’s economic future amid an “exceptionally uncertain” outlook.

Florida lawmakers may keep Disney’s “special-district” status, according to the Financial Times. The designation, which lets Disney operate like a county government at its Orlando-area parks, was set to be revoked after the firm’s former boss criticised a state ban on discussion of sexuality and gender identity among young pupils. But Bob Iger’s return has reportedly helped change lawmakers’ minds. Florida’s governor denied the report.

Germany’s exports dropped more than anticipated in October, official data showed, as high inflation and supply-chain issues continued to bite. Exports fell by 0.6%, the second consecutive monthly decline after a drop of 0.7% in September. The news tempers optimism that the country faces a milder recession than expected after growth figures for the third quarter, announced last week, beat forecasts.

Ukraine has lost between 10,000 and 13,000 soldiers since the war began, according to a senior official. Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, also suggested that around 100,000 Russian soldiers have been killed. Meanwhile Ukraine’s army said Russia is using nuclear-capable missiles armed with non-explosive warheads to “exhaust” the country’s air-defence systems.

Football World Cup: South Korea upset Portugal; both advanced past the group stage. Cameroon ended Brazil’s 17-game World Cup winning streak but that was not enough to progress. Giant-killers Japan and Morocco both moved on, sending Germany and Belgium packing their bags. On Saturday the knockout stage starts.

Word of the Week: fumuguan, a Chinese word meaning “father-mother official” and often used to describe local magistrates in imperial times. Read for the full story.

Migration in the Med

PHOTO: AFP
On Saturday Italy’s prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, is due to address an annual conference about security and co-operation in the Mediterranean region—a touchy subject for her government. In October Italy refused to accept a ship carrying 234 migrants who had been rescued off the coast of Libya. France ultimately allowed it to dock after a bitter tussle with Ms Meloni. Calling her government’s stance “incomprehensible and unacceptable”, the French suspended an agreement to settle 3,500 asylum-seekers currently in Italy.

That deal, struck in June by 18 EU members, was already falling short. Under the pact northern European countries agreed to accept 8,000 asylum-seekers from their southern neighbours within a year. But by mid-November only 117 had been relocated. Expect Ms Meloni to voice the complaint of many Italians—that Italy is being left to deal with Mediterranean migration by itself.

Next up at the World Cup

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
It has taken 48 matches to trim the 32 teams at the football World Cup to 16. Now as the tournament enters the knockout stages on Saturday, it will take just 15 games to reveal a champion. Several fancied teams have made strong starts and look like contenders. The holders, France, should ease past Poland. Likewise, Lionel Messi’s Argentina against Australia. England, too, should have enough attacking prowess to beat Senegal. And Brazil remain favourites to end their 20-year trophy drought.

But there is also plenty of scope for upsets. America will be energetic opponents for the Netherlands, who were not properly tested in a weak group. Morocco, playing in their first knockout match since 1986 and unbeaten so far, will relish the chance to take on Spain. And Japan, fresh from shocking Germany and Spain, will be looking for another European scalp in Croatia, the beaten finalists in 2018.

Native Americans fight for sacred land

PHOTO: AP
Saturday is America’s first Tribal Museums Day. But the celebration takes place amid tension over sacred land in Arizona. Chi’chil Bildagoteel, which measures 6.7 square miles (17.4 sq km), is owned by the federal government. It is also an important religious site for members of the Apache tribe. The Trump administration arranged to transfer it to Rio Tinto and BHP, two multinational mining firms, in a land swap; the copper mine planned for the site could become America’s largest.

Tribal leaders, who gathered this week in Arizona for the Sacred Sites Summit, say that protecting particular sites is a “holy war”. Last year Apache representatives sued the federal government, claiming that losing Chi’chil Bildagoteel would curtail their religious freedom. An appeals court upheld a district-court ruling against them, but in November it agreed to rehear the case. A win for the Apache could help protect other sacred lands—and ensure that they remain part of a living culture, not one relegated to museums alone.

The Sydney Modern opens

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Its opening is being called Sydney’s biggest cultural development since the Opera House was completed nearly 50 years ago. But unlike that landmark, the Sydney Modern, a gallery which opens on Saturday, does not disrupt the skyline: it hunkers into the harbourside, all glass walls and grass-covered roof. The project, costing A$344m ($234m), aims instead to make a mark with its exhibitions. It nearly doubles the floor space of the adjacent Art Gallery of New South Wales and features work by more than 900 artists, including indigenous Australians.

Sydneysiders blush at how their city gets outshone culturally by Melbourne, known for its thriving arts scene. The new gallery aspires to compete with London’s Tate Modern or New York’s Guggenheim, said Ben Franklin, a minister for arts and tourism. Thousands of Sydneysiders have registered to visit. The gallery’s creators will hope for global attention too.

Weekend profile: Alexie, a protester in Shanghai

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Alexie has joined two protests in her life. Both times, the Shanghai coffee-shop owner (whose name we have changed) chanted slogans against China’s government—a good way to risk a jail sentence.

In 2019, to express her own discontent with China’s growing authoritarianism, she travelled to Hong Kong, where she marched with millions of others calling for democratic rule in the territory. She was unable to tell anyone who she was and what she was doing there. “I felt alone, but paradoxically, I had never felt so close to the people around me,” she says.

In the three years since, Chinese officials have only tightened their grip on Hong Kong. Many there have lost hope. Alexie has, too. She considered leaving China on several occasions but ultimately decided against it: not because she didn’t have the means, but because of her “unspeakably deep connections” with her homeland. Alexie is a globetrotter—having lived in Argentina and travelled to nearly all continents, she came back to China four years ago, hoping to establish a stable life, even though it soon started to become “unbearable”, not least because of the prolonged covid-19 lockdowns.

Last Saturday night, she found some solace. She learned from friends that protesters were gathering on Wulumuqi Road, just three kilometres from her apartment. Taking a bouquet of flowers and sheets of white paper, the symbolic weapons of these protests, she joined them. She laid flowers in tribute to the families who had died two days before in a fire in an apartment building in Xinjiang, in far-west China. The building’s exits had reportedly been sealed, to comply with China’s zero-covid policy. The blank paper is more explicitly political, a challenge to China’s strict controls on free expression.

She could hear the chanting from a few blocks away. “No to PCR testing, yes to freedom.” When one person shouted, “Communist Party!”, a handful of people responded tentatively, “Step down!”. Again, the man shouted “Communist Party!”. This time the response was stronger and more joined in, including Alexie: “Step down!”

The next day, clips of the protest she attended flooded Twitter, which is blocked in China but accessed by people with virtual private networks. With dread she stopped the videos on each frame to check if her face was visible (it wasn’t). “I was afraid, and still am, but I just had to go,” she says.

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Former president dancing jig in middle of dense maze (5, 5)

1 across German agreement to criticise another country (6)

2 across Perhaps football is courageous? (5)

3 across Not at all part of career: even in retrospect! (5)

Factual clues

1 down An engineer-turned-economic-reformer (5, 5)

1 across One of America’s Asian friends (6)

2 across This type of subscription is increasingly big business (5)

3 across “The King ___ dies”, according to a legal maxim (5)


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Jin-Hong Park, Suwon, South Korea

North America: Mary Lou Finlay, Toronto, Canada

Central and South America: Federico Tarling, La Plata, Argentina

Europe: Katarzyna Piontas, Sopot, Poland

Africa: Neries Moodley, Durban, South Africa

Oceania: Ewen Mackenzie-Bowie, Auckland, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of Peacock, Rope, Mustard, Candlestick Park and The Scarlet Letter. The theme is Clue (or Cluedo); Mrs Peacock, Colonel Mustard and Miss Scarlet are characters and the rope and candlestick are weapons.

Our business in this world is not to succeed, but to continue to fail, in good spirits.

Robert Louis Stevenson