The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (03:37 GMT / 11:37 Hong Kong)

Britain’s chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, delivered a budget including spending cuts and tax rises that by 2027-28 will be worth £62bn ($73bn), or 2.1% of GDP. He hopes it will restore Britain’s fiscal credibility after his predecessor damaged it with a programme of unfunded tax cuts. Mr Hunt froze the tax thresholds for income tax, national insurance and inheritance tax, meaning that pay rises will push taxpayers into higher tax bands. State pensions, benefits and tax credits will rise by 10.1%, September’s inflation rate. Most government departments will see their budgets rise by less than the rate of inflation.

Nancy Pelosi announced she will step down from her role as leader of the Democratic Party in America’s House of Representatives, a position she has held since 2003. Ms Pelosi, who was the first woman to lead either major party in Congress, will continue to serve as a representative from California. Earlier, the Republican Party narrowly regained control of the House; Ms Pelosi’s replacement will now be in the minority.

A Dutch court ruled that flight MH17, a Malaysian Airlines’ plane shot down over Ukraine in 2014, was hit by a Russian-made missile system fired by a Kremlin-controlled militia. Two Russians and one Ukrainian were found guilty of murder for downing the passenger plane, killing 298 people. All three men have been handed life sentences, but are unlikely to be extradited to the Netherlands.

Alibaba, a Chinese e-commerce giant, reported weak third-quarter growth with revenues reaching 207bn yuan ($29bn), a rise of only 3% compared with the same period a year earlier. China’s zero-covid policy has hurt the firm by hampering consumer spending. On November 11th “Singles’ Day”, when Chinese shoppers usually splurge online, was met with a lukewarm response.

The UN secretary-general, António Guterres, confirmed that an agreement with Russia to allow Ukraine to export grain by sea, despite an ongoing Russian blockade, would be extended by 120 days. Mr Guterres also said the UN was “fully committed” to facilitating Russian export of food and fertiliser. Russia wants to export ammonia, a vital ingredient in fertiliser, through a pipeline running into Odessa, a Ukrainian port.

The newly-installed CEO of FTX denounced the “complete failure of corporate controls” and “absence of trustworthy financial information” at the collapsed crypto exchange. In a filing to federal bankruptcy court, John Ray said it was the worst situation he had seen in 40 years of overseeing liquidations. FTX filed for bankruptcy last week, leaving behind some 1m creditors and triggering investigations by America’s Justice Department, its House Financial Services Committee and several regulators.

Italy’s Catholic bishops released the country’s first report documenting cases of sex abuse by members of the clergy. They also revealed that they were researching more than 600 cases on file at the Vatican dating back to 2000. But after decades of inaction, the report itself is disappointing in scope: limited to allegations reported to Italian church authorities within the past two years, it identified just 89 presumed victims.

Fact of the day: Almost $3trn, the peak market value of all cryptocurrencies last year. Today it is down to $830bn. Read the full story.

Correction: Thursday’s fact of the day stated that there are forecast to be 300m fewer international tourist trips taken in 2023 than were taken in 2019. The difference is forecast to be 200m. Sorry.

COP creeps towards a conclusion

PHOTO: AP
COP27, the UN climate conference held this year in Egypt, is meant to end on Friday. But expecting the talks to conclude on time was optimistic. Negotiations have stuttered and stalled throughout the past two weeks. On Thursday night all that was available from the summit was a 20-page outline of suggestions for a global climate plan, in which almost everything had yet to be finalised.

COPs often run overtime. COP21, at which the Paris Agreement was signed, and COP26 in Glasgow stretched into an extra day. Negotiations at this year’s summit have proceeded especially slowly.

The biggest dispute is over a “loss-and-damage” fund. Poor countries are demanding that rich ones pay them for the damage they have already incurred because of rising temperatures. There is also debate over whether summiteers should commit to phasing down the use of “all fossil fuels”, including natural gas, which is cleaner than other sorts. Hopes for a substantive outcome are fading.

APEC meets in Bangkok

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Asian countries have hosted a trio of summits in recent weeks. After the ASEAN summit, in Cambodia, and the G20, in Indonesia, comes the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation forum, in Thailand. During the three-day conference, which continues on Friday, APEC’s 21 members are expected to ratify the “Bangkok Goals”, a plan for climate action. That is welcome. But two concerns hang over proceedings.

The first is anxiety about the global economy. Smaller APEC countries fear economic downturns will hit America and China, their main trading partners. And governments in the Asia-Pacific, like those elsewhere, are also confronted with rising inflation.

The second worry is whether America and China, the two biggest APEC members, can credibly co-operate in an age of strategic rivalry. China’s president, Xi Jinping, will be working the corridors in Bangkok, but America’s president, Joe Biden will not (his vice-president, Kamala Harris, is standing in). “The Asia-Pacific is no one’s backyard, and should not become an arena for a big-power contest,” Mr Xi declared on Thursday. Would that it were so.

Russia’s G20 hangover

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Friday Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, will discuss the “new geopolitical environment” at a meeting in Moscow of the Council of Heads of the Subjects of the Russian Federation, an assembly of regional governors and high-ranking officials. Most governors are fiercely loyal to President Vladimir Putin, and are likely to give Mr Lavrov a warm homecoming after his challenging week representing Russia at the G20 summit in Bali. (His boss declined an invitation.)

Western leaders at the G20 made clear their fury at Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. But Mr Lavrov will be more concerned about subtler rebukes from leaders who have been more equivocal. Xi Jinping, China’s president, a crucial ally for Mr Putin, decried the “weaponisation” of food and energy, an apparent reference to the painful economic consequences of the war. Russia’s agreement on Thursday to extend a deal allowing exports of Ukrainian grain via the Black Sea could help assuage Mr Xi’s concerns. But patience among Russia’s friends is wearing thin.

Brazil’s new era of diplomacy

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva will not be inaugurated as Brazil’s president—an office he first held nearly 20 years ago—until January 1st. But the new-old president-elect is already on his diplomatic travels. On Wednesday he spoke in Egypt at COP27, the UN’s climate conference. Lula said “Brazil is back” and promised to fight deforestation in the Amazon rainforest. On Friday he is in Lisbon, at the first bilateral summit between Brazil and Portugal since 2016.

Lula’s approach to environmental and foreign policy is markedly different from that of Jair Bolsonaro, the right-wing populist he beat in October’s election. Mr Bolsonaro did not attend the previous two COP summits and, on his watch, deforestation in the Amazon spiked by 73% between 2018 and 2021. Whereas Mr Bolsonaro discouraged foreign help to protect the rainforest, Lula has asked for it. That is already paying off: after Lula’s election, Germany and Norway said they would once again contribute to the “Amazon Fund” of money used by Brazil for conservation.


The Weinstein scandal on film

PHOTO: AP
“She Said”, the first major Hollywood film to focus on Hollywood’s most recent big scandal, is released in America on Friday. It stars Zoe Kazan and Carey Mulligan as Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey, journalists at the New York Times who in 2017 investigated sexual abuse by Harvey Weinstein, a powerful producer.

The pair’s findings ignited the #MeToo movement and chipped away at the film industry’s institutional sexism. The director of “She Said”, Maria Schrader, and its screenwriter, Rebecca Lenkiewicz, are both women, which before 2017 would have been unusual for a drama about a newspaper. Their film follows a formula established by “All The President’s Men” (1976), about the Washington Post’s Watergate sleuthing, by chronicling the exhausting, unglamorous work of frustrating phone calls and long editorial meetings.

This explosive story deserved a less conventional telling. But it makes some sharp feminist points. The two newshounds contend with postnatal depression, bar-room lechers and the school run. Those were never an issue for the men at the Post.

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Karamjit Bharti, Nangal, India
North America: Eric Thorson, Kingston, Ontario, Canada
Central and South America: Sylvia Freund, San Salvador, El Salvador
Europe: Thierry Rajaobelina, Montpellier, France
Africa: Paul Leigh, Pretoria, South Africa
Oceania: Roberta MacDonald, Runaway Bay, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Ron DeSantis, reboot, sohan and Sharif. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which author produced a hoax autobiography of the reclusive tycoon, Howard Hughes?

Thursday: Which rock group produced the international hit “Chasing Cars”?

Poetry is not only dream or vision, it is the skeleton architecture of our lives.

Audre Lorde