The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (23:51 GMT / 07:51 Hong Kong)

Emmanuel Macron, the French president, promised delegates at the United Nations’ annual climate summit that the war in Ukraine (and the energy crisis it triggered) will not mean his country slacks on its climate commitments. Speaking at COP27 in Egypt, Mr Macron also said trust between rich countries and poor ones is being eroded and called for “financial solidarity”.

Greece’s government said it would ban the sale of spyware after a newspaper reported that ministers and businesspeople had been surveilled by the state via malware on their phones. A government spokesman said the report in Documento was “unfounded” and denied buying spyware. Officials from the European Parliament were already investigating whether Greece’s ruling party illegally snooped on politicians and a journalist.

The Ethiopian government and Tigrayan forces met in Kenya for talks on implementing a truce, agreed last Wednesday, which has brought a ceasefire to a bloody, nearly three-year-long conflict. The two sides have set up a telephone hotline, reportedly in order to coordinate disengagement from fighting. Hundreds of thousands of people are believed to have died in the war; millions more have been displaced.

A prominent ally of Vladimir Putin acknowledged interfering in America’s elections and promised to keep doing so “carefully, precisely, surgically”. The statement from Yevgeny Prigozhin, a businessman who runs a firm of private mercenaries known as the Wagner Group, and who was indicted for meddling in the 2016 presidential election, comes a day before Americans go to the polls.

Meta is expected to announce thousands of redundancies this week, according to a report by the Wall Street Journal. They will be the first large-scale lay-offs since Facebook was launched 18 years ago. Meanwhile Twitter has asked some sacked workers to return, after cutting half its staff last week; apparently dozens were laid off accidentally. American tech has already shed more than 45,000 jobs this year.

Ryanair, an Irish airline, posted a post-tax profit of €1.37bn ($1.36bn) in the six months to the end of September, a record for the first half of its financial year. The airline, Europe’s biggest by passengers carried, expects demand to remain strong as customers switch from more expensive rivals. Several airlines are seeing high ticket sales despite soaring inflation.

China reported more than 5,600 new covid-19 cases on Monday, its highest caseload since May. Lockdowns in major manufacturing cities, including Zhengzhou and Wuhan, have come at a cost. Some Chinese leaders are reportedly considering softening their strict zero-covid policy, according to the Wall Street Journal. But there doesn’t appear to be a clear timeline for any such change.

Fact of the day: 60%, the share of the 828m people who do not get enough food who also live in countries racked by conflict. Read the full story.

America’s midterm election day

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Tuesday Americans go to the polls—or, to be more precise, finish going to the polls. More than 40m voters have cast early ballots in the midterms, pointing to the continuation of a trend of record-high turnout in American elections. After see-sawing for months, most pundits now predict a good night for Republicans. They are expected to win a majority in the House and are favoured to do so in the Senate.

Though Democrats are buoyed by support for abortion rights, they are burdened by inflation, crime, an unpopular president and a historical pattern that the party holding the White House loses ground in midterms. Even if the Democrats do better than expected, many Republican candidates have refused to commit to honouring the results should they lose, following the example of Donald Trump in 2020. A political cliché—that “the only poll that matters” is on election day—may be put to the test.

India and Russia’s mutual admiration

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, India’s foreign minister, will meet Sergey Lavrov, his Russian counterpart, in Moscow on Tuesday. The atmosphere will be cordial. Trade between two countries has soared and is set to exceed $30bn next year, two years before the target set for it to do so. India is now one of the main buyers of Russian oil, which is under sanctions from the West. It is also one of the best customers for Russian weapons.

In September, after months of silence, Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, finally commented on President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. “This is not an era of war”, he said, adding that “democracy, diplomacy and dialogue” were needed instead. But despite claiming to be “deeply disturbed”, India has repeatedly refused to vote on any United Nations’ resolution condemning the war. In return Mr Putin has praised Mr Modi as a “great patriot” and lauded his ability “to pursue independent foreign policy”.

Blockbuster meme stocks have a difficult next act

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
AMC, the world’s largest cinema chain, will report its quarterly results on Tuesday. In 2020, lockdowns shutting cinemas tanked the company’s revenues by nearly 80%, bringing it close to bankruptcy. In 2021, its fortunes shifted with the meme-stock frenzy, as retail investors stampeded into the market to squeeze professional short-sellers targeting beloved companies. Between January and June 2021, its share price rose from just above $2 to $61, a rally egged on by Adam Aron, AMC’s iconoclastic boss, on social media.

The hype is now fizzling out. Shares are trading below $6. Revenue has been recovering, but analysts expect it to remain below 2019 levels this year and next as cinema attendance remains depressed (viewers can now often watch new films at home). AMC’s problems will be further exacerbated by a lack of blockbuster releases between now and Christmas. Investors spooked by the collapse of Cineworld, a rival company, in September are now eyeing AMC with more concern.

Financial fault lines at COP27

PHOTO: AP
On Tuesday Gaston Browne, the prime minister of Antigua and Barbuda, will address COP27, the United Nations annual climate summit currently taking place in Sharm el-Sheik, Egypt. Speaking on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States, a group of countries that has the most to lose from rising temperatures and sea levels, Mr Browne is expected to focus on their dire need for more cash to cope.

Arguments over money will be at the heart of this year’s conference. Rich countries have long promised to provide poor ones with $100bn in climate finance a year by 2020—a goal which has still not been met. Poor countries have increasingly been calling for “loss and damage” funding to help them offset the damage they have already incurred as a result of climate change. For the first time the topic is on the formal agenda, after heated arguments about it delayed the start of the summit by hours. But large economies like America hate the idea, and any serious resolution remains unlikely.


How HBO changed television

PHOTO: ALAMY
Fifty years ago on Tuesday HBO broadcast its first programme—a hockey match. The television network’s early offering combined live sport with uncensored films. As a paid-for cable channel, it was not subject to the same government restrictions on content as broadcast television, nor did it have to please advertisers.

Capitalising on this freedom, HBO started developing original dramas; creations often revelled in violence, sex and swearing. “It’s not TV. It’s HBO” proclaimed a famous slogan first used in 1996. The network soon became a television trend-setter. Hit gangster-drama “The Sopranos” created a zest for antiheroes, something subsequently copied by AMC (the network, not the cinema company) with shows like “Mad Men” and “Breaking Bad”. “Game of Thrones”—HBO’s most successful drama, which scooped up 59 Emmy awards during its eight-season run—fueled appetite for fantasy. With high production values and demanding narratives, the network changed viewers’ expectations of television and paved the way for companies like Netflix. Those streamers are now HBO’s main competition.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: “Go Set a Watchman” was the second published novel of which famous author?

Monday: Which rock star recorded his first single under the name “Davie Jones with the King Bees”?

There was another life that I might have had, but I am having this one.

Kazuo Ishiguro