The world in brief
June 20, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, met Xi Jinping, China’s president, in Beijing. After the meeting Mr Xi reported that the two sides had “made progress and reached agreement on some specific issues”. At a press conference Mr Blinken said that he had raised areas of “agreement and disagreement” during his visit, including the war in Ukraine and the issue of Taiwan. Mr Blinken said that America does not support Taiwan’s independence, but is concerned about China’s recent incursions into the Taiwan Strait.

Britain said it would maintain sanctions against Russia until the country agrees to pay full compensation to Ukraine. Meanwhile, Ukraine made “small advances” in its counter-offensive. But a Russian-appointed official acknowledged that Ukraine had recaptured Piatykhatky in the Zaporizhia region. It is the eighth village the country has recaptured in the two weeks since the beginning of its counter-offensive.

British MPs backed a parliamentary report that found that Boris Johnson had misled them about lockdown parties, by a vote of 354 to seven. More than 200 MPs abstained or failed to show, including the current prime minister, Rishi Sunak, whom an opposition lawmaker accused of a “cowardly cop-out”. Mr Johnson—who earlier resigned as an MP—will have his parliamentary pass revoked.

Intel, an American chipmaker, will invest $33bn into building two semiconductor facilities in Magdeburg in east Germany. The German government has attracted criticism for proposing to subsidise the mega-site with €6.8bn ($7.4bn) of taxpayer money. Intel is betting big on the fast-growing semiconductor market: on Friday the company announced another major factory in Poland.

India’s largest airline, IndiGo, ordered 500 planes in a record deal with Airbus, a European manufacturer, worth almost $50bn. The budget-carrier operates 60% of India’s domestic flights, but has plans to expand into Central Asia. The deal eclipses a recent order by Air India, another Indian airline, for 470 jets from Airbus and Boeing, an American planemaker, in February.

Moldova’s constitutional court banned Sor, a populist pro-Russian party founded in 1998. In recent months the party has organised a series of anti-government protests which the country’s pro-Western government has decried as attempts by Russia to “destabilise” Moldova. Before its dissolution, the party was led by Ilan Shor, a pro-Russian oligarch who was convicted of fraud this year.

The US coast guard launched a rescue operation in search of a tourist submarine that has gone missing near the wreck of the Titanic. It is unclear how many people are on board the missing vessel, which can carry five passengers and is operated by OceanGate Expeditions. The Titanic lies about 740km off the coast of Newfoundland and 3.8km under water.

Figure of the day: 20%, the proportion by which land-sales revenues have fallen in China so far this year. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
Diplomats from Germany and China meet
The tradition of biennial top-level consultations between China and Germany resumes in Berlin this week after an interruption during the pandemic. A delegation led by Li Qiang, the new Chinese premier, was received by Germany’s president and chancellor on Monday and will plunge into talks with German ministers on Tuesday.

Much has changed since the last such meeting five years ago. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine exposed Germany’s overdependence on Russian energy, prompting moves to “de-risk” all of its economic relations, including those with China, its biggest trading partner after the EU. Meanwhile tensions between China and America, Germany’s closest ally, have risen.

Will Mr Li play tough, exploiting the deep reliance of big German firms on the Chinese market to drive a wedge between the Western allies? Or will he be more concerned by falling investment in China’s own sluggish economy, and instead turn on the charm? With the world’s second- and fourth-biggest GDPs at play, the answer to those questions carries great weight.


PHOTO: REUTERS
The EU reviews its budget
The European Union’s mid-term budget review used to be of interest only to diehard Euro-nerds. Not any more. When the EU agreed in 2020 on a €2trn ($2.2trn) budget for 2021-27, including an €800bn post-covid recovery fund, that marked a large increase. Since then difficulties have mounted. The war in Ukraine and the energy shock and inflation that followed, as well as the EU’s response to America’s lavish green subsidies, all require more spending.

Sensing a political opportunity to put more money under its control, the European Commission, the union’s executive arm, will on Tuesday propose increasing the budget. Yet appetite among increasingly cash-strapped northern European governments, the EU budget’s main funders, is low. Everyone agrees that the EU should continue to support Ukraine and help finance its reconstruction. But elsewhere the budget will probably remain unchanged. So to fill a mooted sovereignty fund to support Europe’s strategic industries, the EU will have to shift money from other programmes.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
An African energy summit
For African governments a lack of energy—especially electricity—is an obstacle to development that must urgently be overcome. The average American fridge consumes more electricity each year than does the average African person. So policymakers will have plenty to discuss when they meet on Tuesday for the four-day Africa Energy Forum in Nairobi, Kenya’s capital.

Summits such as this one are a chance for governments to attract investment for much-needed domestic power projects. Yet they are also an opportunity for African countries to highlight their important role in achieving global energy and climate goals. African countries which export natural gas, such as Algeria, have become an important source for countries looking to replace Russian gas. The continent is also a rich source of metals which are needed to make electric-vehicle batteries as well as, potentially, “green” hydrogen made using renewable energy. Ensuring that Africa’s own needs are not overlooked in the global scramble for energy is the job of its policymakers—and their supporters in the West.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Cost-cutting at FedEx
Online shopping boomed during the pandemic. But as household budgets are strained by inflation and rising interest rates, consumers are now buying less. That is challenging the business models of delivery firms. On Tuesday Federal Express, an American giant, will present its latest results.

FedEx faces several difficulties. Shipping demand is falling as the global economy cools. Amazon is capturing a growing share of the delivery market, and other large retailers, such as Walmart, are reining in new orders amid a glut of unsold goods.

FedEx’s response in September last year was to instigate the largest restructuring in its 50-year history. The company has already sacked staff, reduced flights, closed offices and parked planes. And combining its previously separate air and ground operations into one business could slash costs by $4bn over the next two years. But the plan is not without risk. Wall Street will be looking for evidence that FedEx can deliver.


PHOTO: MARC BRENNAN
How Southgate saved English football
When Gareth Southgate took over as manager of the England football team in 2016 its record was appalling. That summer England had been humiliated in the European championships by tiny Iceland. The previous manager had resigned after just one game and Mr Southgate, a former international player and coach of the under-21 team, was drafted in as an “interim” manager. He has been there ever since, winning games and restoring national pride in the team. This turnaround is the subject of “Dear England”, which opens at the National Theatre in London on Tuesday.

James Graham’s play is a forensic examination of football as a national psychodrama. As a player Mr Southgate, played by Joseph Fiennes, was haunted by missing a vital penalty in a shoot-out against Germany in 1996. To lift the crippling burden of expectation from his players he employs a sports psychologist to force them to face their deepest fears. Redemption, it seems, is a game of two halves.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which famous comedian and film star died at the age of 100 in 2003?

Monday: Which book by Gaston Leroux was adapted into a musical by Andrew Lloyd Webber?

Cynicism is an unpleasant way of saying the truth.

Lillian Hellman
