The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (22:58 GMT+1 / 05:58 Hong Kong)

Explosions were reported at a military base in Russian-occupied Crimea, damaging a munition depot. Russia blamed an “act of sabotage”; Ukraine neither accepted nor denied responsibility. Separately, Ukraine claimed to have struck and destroyed a forward base of the Wagner Group, a Russian mercenary outfit, in Ukrainian territory. There was more shelling around Zaporizhzhia, Europe’s biggest nuclear plant, now in Russian hands.

Raila Odinga, the former opposition leader who lost Kenya’s presidential election, said the results were “null and void”. Mr Odinga lost to William Ruto, the country’s deputy president, who won with 50.49% of the vote. He is not alone in his challenge of the outcome: four out of seven election commissioners also refused to endorse the result, calling the final stage of the electoral process “opaque”. A legal battle now looms.

Tencent, China’s biggest tech firm, will reportedly sell all or much of its $24bn stake in Meituan, a food delivery platform, partly in an attempt to mollify the Chinese government. Shares of Meituan dropped by over 10% following the report from Reuters, while Tencent’s fell by more than 2%. Since late 2020 Chinese regulators have cracked down on tech giants such as Tencent.

Republican primary voters in Wyoming headed to the polls to decide the fate of Liz Cheney, a congresswoman all but certain to lose her seat to Harriet Hageman, a lawyer. She earned her party’s opprobrium for voting to impeach President Donald Trump and for investigating his role in the Capitol riot. Meanwhile in Alaska, Sarah Palin, a former governor and vice-presidential candidate, is seeking a comeback in her race for the state’s lone House seat.

The Biden administration announced further cuts to water usage from the Colorado River for Arizona, Nevada and Mexico starting next year. Arizona’s annual apportionment will shrink the most, by about a fifth. This summer the water level in Lake Mead, America’s largest reservoir, sank to a historic low amid a megadrought in the south-west.

Finland said it will cut the number of visas issued to Russian nationals to 10% of the current volume, beginning September 1st. Many Russian tourists circumvent bans on Russian planes by transiting through Finland towards European holiday spots. Finland said it is also considering creating humanitarian visas for Russians seeking to flee the country. Finland and Estonia have called for a EU-wide visa ban on Russian nationals, a move supported by Ukraine but opposed by Germany.

Walmart’s quarterly results beat expectations, with sales up by more than 8% year on year, to $153bn. The retail giant said more middle- and high-income shoppers were visiting its stores in search of deals. Earlier the beast of Bentonville lowered its profit forecast, warning that discretionary spending would drop amid high inflation.

Fact of the day: 55%, the share of violence reported across Afghanistan that can be attributed to the Taliban. Read the full story.

Correction: an earlier version of The World in Brief said Raila Odinga is a former president of Kenya. He is in fact a former prime minister. Sorry.

Resuscitating the Iran nuclear deal

PHOTO: EPA
Until recently the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action looked beyond salvage. Now there is a glimmer of hope for the revival of the nuclear deal signed by Iran and six world powers in 2015, and abandoned by Donald Trump in 2018. Last week the European Union circulated a “final text” and demanded Iran reply to it by Monday. To everyone’s relief, it did. Mohammad Marandi, an adviser to Iran’s negotiating team, sounded upbeat. “The remaining issues are not very difficult to resolve”, he tweeted.

That remains to be seen. Iran wants the International Atomic Energy Agency, a UN watchdog, to shut down its probe into the country’s past illicit nuclear activity, despite many unanswered questions. It also wants to be sure that it will feel the benefit of sanctions relief. Western diplomats worry that Iran is eking out talks while continuing to expand its nuclear programme. Two weeks ago Iran began feeding fresh uranium gas into hundreds of new centrifuges. A deal may be in sight, but it is not yet in hand.

Lithuania celebrates the Karaims

PHOTO: ALAMY
One of Europe’s smallest minority populations, the Karaims, are being celebrated in Lithuania this year. On Wednesday Karolina Cicha, a folk musician, will perform in Trakai, a city in south-east Lithuania that has historically been home to the Karaims. The fact that Ms Cicha is actually Polish will do little to dampen the party.

Who are the Karaims? At some point around the 14th century—1397, according to the Lithuanian parliament, who thought the 625th anniversary was as good a reason as any to celebrate—Vytautas, the grand duke of Lithuania, invited them from Crimea, to serve as bodyguards and traders. Some also went to Poland. Today there are only a few hundred Karaims left in each country.

But unlike many minorities, the Karaims have been welcomed in their adopted homes. Launching the year of celebrations in May Ingrida Simonyte, Lithuania’s prime minister, said that the Karaim swere a “unique treasure” who enriched the country’s present and future.

Charlotte Perkins Gilman

