The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 15, 2023
Several big private-equity firms—including Apollo, Blackstone and KKR—are reportedly considering acquiring pieces of Silicon Valley Bank’s loan book. Meanwhile America’s Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission are probing the sale of SVB stock by its executives days before the lender collapsed, according to the Wall Street Journal. The share prices of other mid-tier banks recovered slightly after Monday’s sell-off.

America’s consumer-price index rose by 6% year-on-year in February. Annual core inflation, which excludes food and fuel prices, was 5.5%, a 0.1 percentage-point drop from January. Despite persistently high inflation, the Federal Reserve may well opt for less aggressive tightening later this month, owing to the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank.

A Russian Su-27 fighter jet intercepted and struck the propeller of an American drone, forcing the unmanned aircraft into the Black Sea, according to the Pentagon. The drone was conducting a routine operation over international waters when two Russian planes apparently flew in front of it. An official condemned the jets’ “reckless” manoeuvring; America said it will summon Russia’s ambassador to discuss the incident.

Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad, arrived in Moscow to meet his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, on Wednesday. Mr Putin has long backed Mr Assad’s pariah government in Damascus, intervening on its behalf in the country’s bloody civil war. The meeting comes before Russia hosts diplomats from Iran, Syria and Turkey on Wednesday and Thursday. Turkey supports rebel groups who control north-west Syria.

Eva Högl, the German parliament’s defence ombudsman, said that “not a single euro or cent” had been spent of her country’s €100bn ($107bn) fund to modernise its run-down army. Chancellor Olaf Scholz announced the extra spending—double the annual defence budget—three days after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Since then there has been little sign of increased military procurement.

Cyclone Freddy, the longest lasting tropical storm on record, killed more than 100 people in Mozambique and Malawi in overnight mudslides. Setting off from the coast of Australia, Freddy crossed the entire Indian Ocean before first hitting land at Madagascar. The storm, which has now persisted for 35 days and follows a rare loop trajectory, hit the southern African countries twice in one month.

Higashitani Yoshikazu, a celebrity-gossip YouTuber turned politician, was expelled from Japan’s upper house by his colleagues after he refused to attend a single legislative session. Mr Higashitani, elected seven months ago, never even entered the parliament. Last week the legislature demanded that GaaSyy, as he is known on YouTube, come to Tokyo and apologise—he didn’t show up.

Fact of the day: 729,000km, the length of India’s rural road network this year, up from 381,000km in 2014. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Ukraine asks for more ammo
The Ukraine Defence Contact Group, an alliance of countries which are supporting Ukraine’s war effort, meets virtually on Wednesday. Western countries have been accelerating arms transfers to Ukraine ahead of a counter-offensive that might begin this month. The country is slowly accumulating European tanks, but it is thought to be desperately short of ammunition. It has asked the EU to supply 250,000 artillery shells per month.

On the battlefield, Ukraine is facing criticism for its decision to mount a tenacious defence of Bakhmut, an eastern city that has been besieged for months. Though Russian casualties still exceed Ukrainian ones, the ratio has grown less favourable since December, after Russia seized the northern approaches. But Russia may be exhausting itself, too. On Sunday Ukraine’s general staff said that 1,090 Russian troops had been killed the previous day—one of the deadliest of the war.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Britain’s long-awaited budget speech
On Wednesday Britain’s chancellor of the exchequer, Jeremy Hunt, will unveil the government’s plan for spending and tweaks to the tax system. In November Mr Hunt undid much of his predecessor’s tax cuts. Since then economic data has come in better than expected. Lower wholesale gas prices and better tax receipts mean that in the year to January borrowing has been around £30bn ($37bn) less than the Office for Budget Responsibility, the fiscal watchdog, predicted.

Some of that windfall will be recycled into short-term giveaways. The government is already expected to extend energy subsidies for households. Long-term tax cuts or increases in spending, however, will depend on whether the OBR anticipates that Britain’s long-term growth prospects stay as rosy. It is Mr Hunt’s job to ensure that happens. He is set to tweak pension rules for high earners and child-care benefits to keep workers in the labour force. He may also address Britain’s weak investment through tax breaks for capital and research spending.



PHOTO: REUTERS
Japanese wage talks
Every spring trade unions and managers at big Japanese companies negotiate pay for the coming year in a ritual known as shunto, or the “spring offensive”. The results, which will begin trickling out on Wednesday, ripple through Japan’s economy. This year’s outcome will help determine whether the Bank of Japan moves away from its loose monetary policy. Even though rising import costs have pushed headline inflation to a 40-year high of 4.2% in February, the BoJ reckons inflation will fade without sustainable wage growth.

For decades Japanese workers have seen pay levels barely budge, beyond seniority-determined bumps. This year may be different. The labour market in greying Japan is tight. Labour unions have requested the most aggressive wage increases since 1995. Many blue-chip companies have already announced bigger-than-normal increases. Even so, analysts expect the numbers to fall short of what’s needed to keep inflation growing steadily at the BoJ’s 2% target.


PHOTO: LNP
Ethiopia’s war-wrecked economy
America’s secretary of state, Antony Blinken, is in Addis Ababa on Wednesday to meet Ethiopia’s prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, and leaders from the rebel region of Tigray. A peace deal between the federal government and the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front in November put an end to a devastating civil war that since November 2020 has caused hundreds of thousands of deaths through fighting, hunger and disease.

Abiy, as he is known, wants America to lift the restrictions on aid it imposed at the height of the fighting. He is especially keen on restoring duty-free access to America for Ethiopian goods, which was frozen in 2022 in response to war crimes and human-rights abuses committed by Ethiopian forces.

American officials are divided on the matter. Implementation of the peace accord has been unexpectedly smooth. But there is no sign that Abiy intends to allow international human-rights investigators into Tigray, which both foreign donors and victims of the war are demanding. Ethiopia’s economy may need to wait longer for a lifeline.


PHOTO: ALAMY
The Vatican champions sports
On Wednesday the Vatican City’s government will stage the first in a series of conversations with top athletes. Filippo Tortu, an Italian sprinter and Olympic gold-medallist, will share his story with the head of the dicastery, or ministry, for culture and education, Cardinal José Tolentino de Mendonça. They will riff off the theme of “When sport makes you nobler,” a phrase used by Pope Francis last December.

The Holy See’s focus on both body and soul goes back hundreds of years. In 1521 a game of Florentine calcio, an early form of football, was held in the courtyard of the Vatican Palace. In 2022 its football league for teams linked to the city-state celebrated its 50th anniversary. At a ceremony to mark that event, Pope Francis, a fan of his hometown club of San Lorenzo, declared: “The test is not on the numerical result, but how faithful we were.” Easy for him to say: San Lorenzo currently leads Argentina’s Primera División.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Wednesday: Which spice, often used to flavour ice cream, is derived from a species of orchid?

Tuesday: Japan abolished which hereditary caste of military nobility in 1876?

The quality will remain long after the price is forgotten.

Henry Royce
