The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (22:09 GMT / 06:09 Hong Kong)

Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, said any remaining civilians in Kherson in southern Ukraine should leave, his first public acknowledgement that Ukrainian forces are drawing close to the occupied city. Reports emerged on Thursday that Russian troops were retreating to the east bank of the Dnieper river, though Ukrainian officials warned it could be a trap. Meanwhile, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, said 4.5m of his countrymen were without power, as Russia continued to bomb Ukrainian energy infrastructure.

Employers in America added 261,000 jobs in October, a sign that the labour market remains robust. But it may be cooling: a separate household survey showed a decline in employment of 328,000 and an uptick in the unemployment rate, to 3.7%. Average hourly earnings increased by 4.7% from a year ago—well above the Federal Reserve’s 2% inflation target.

Donald Trump will launch his campaign for the 2024 presidential election after the midterms, according to Axios, a news site. On Thursday, at a rally, America’s former president said he would “very, very, very probably do it again” to make the country “safe and glorious”. Separately, a jury acquitted his former adviser and donor, Thomas Barrack, on charges of illegally lobbying on behalf of the United Arab Emirates.

Elon Musk said Twitter had seen a “massive drop in revenue” owing to “activist groups pressuring advertisers”, even though content-moderation policies had not changed. Activists, he warned, want to “destroy free speech in America”. Advertisers are reportedly worried about Twitter turning into a far-right cesspool under the social-media firm’s new boss. About half of Twitter’s 7,500 staff were reportedly sacked on Friday.

Imran Khan, Pakistan’s former prime minister, accused his successor, Shehbaz Sharif, and two other officials of plotting to assassinate him after he was shot in the leg. They denied involvement; Mr Khan is recovering. The army asked the government to investigate the attack—as well as “those responsible for defamation and false accusations against [it]”. The gunman said he acted alone.

The Wagner Group, a Russian firm of private mercenaries, opened a store-front location in St Petersburg. Billed as a hub to attract “IT specialists”, the centre marks an attempt by Wagner’s shadowy founder, Yevgeny Prigozhin, to build his public profile. Until recently Mr Prigozhin—whose soldiers have fought covertly in Syria, Africa and elsewhere—laid low. But now he appears to want an active, public role in Russian defence policy.

Stocks across Asia rose amid reports that China might relax its stringent covid-19 rules in early 2023. Rumours emerged that a former head of China’s disease prevention commission said that the border with Hong Kong could open early next year, with further reopening to follow. Hong Kong-listed stocks were up by around 6% on Friday, with those in Shanghai rising by over 2%.

Word of the week: pesantrens, Indonesia’s Islamic boarding schools, testing grounds for the “eco-Islam” movement. Read the full story.

The battle for Pennsylvania

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Saturday, three days before the midterms, presidents current and past—Joe Biden, Donald Trump and Barack Obama—will descend on Pennsylvania for a final bout of campaigning. Democrats are keen to pick up the state’s open Senate seat, which would allow them to keep control of Congress’s upper chamber even if they were to lose another close seat, like Nevada. A Republican victory could well hand control of the Senate to the Republican Party.

The Democratic candidate, John Fetterman, who suffered a stroke in May, held a steady polling lead this summer. But Mehmet Oz, the Trump-endorsed Republican contender, has since advanced in the polls. Our forecast puts him within a whisker of overtaking Mr Fetterman.

Whether the race has narrowed because establishment Republicans have “come home”, or because voters are concerned about Mr Fetterman’s fitness, it was always going to be a dogfight. And it may be some time before a winner is declared: poll workers cannot begin processing mailed ballots until election day.

Campaign season begins in Malaysia

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Saturday campaigning for Malaysia’s general election, scheduled for November 19th, officially starts. But lawmakers have not stopped scheming since voters last had their say four years ago. In the interim three prime ministers from three coalition governments watched their backs until their necks were sore. Just about every party has tasted power, and is thus, in the eyes of voters, partly responsible for Malaysia’s mess. Prices are increasing, the currency is weakening and wages are stagnating.

The coalition of the historic ruling party, UMNO, has the best shot at forming a government. That is despite the jailing of its previous prime minister, Najib Razak, for his role in the 1MDB affair that saw billions of dollars vanish from state coffers. The two other blocs despise each other. UMNO might fancy its chances in a divided field. But none of this means that the politicking will be over two weeks from now.

A rugby tournament returns to Hong Kong

PHOTO: EPA
The Hong Kong Rugby Sevens, the city’s biggest sporting event, is back this weekend—just. The coronavirus pandemic meant the 2020 and 2021 editions were cancelled, while the 2022 event was postponed from its usual slot in April.

The government’s original hair-brained scheme for the spectacularly boozy event—that fans could drink but not eat in the stadium to limit covid transmission—was thankfully binned. Still, capacity at the Hong Kong Stadium will be reduced, masks will be compulsory and the women’s event will not take place. The organisers expect most of the crowd to be locals, given the relatively recent relaxation of the rules governing foreign arrivals. Nevertheless the organiser, the Hong Kong Rugby Union, reports that ticket sales to locals are above average. On the field, Fiji remain the team to beat, having won seven of the past eight tournaments, as well as gold medals in the men’s event at the 2016 and 2020 Olympics.

Contemporary art among the pyramids

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Visitors to Egypt’s Great Pyramid of Giza this month will see modern art next to ancient treasures. The second edition of “Forever is Now”, a public art exhibition, places contemporary sculptures and interactive installations alongside monuments such as the Great Sphinx. Meta, parent company of Instagram, has released augmented-reality filters to guide people around the sites.

Art D’Égypte, the organiser, sought participation from 12 artists from around the world. Their brief was to think about immortality; some grapple with sustainability and environmental disruption. One of the works is an installation from Litre of Light, an organisation that helps poor communities construct solar lights. Meanwhile the question of how to meet the world’s growing energy needs without further endangering the future will be debated fiercely 500km to the south-east in Sharm el-Sheikh, where the UN’s annual climate summit begins on Sunday.

Weekend profile: Kari Lake, Arizona’s Republican candidate for governor

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The first time she was “cancelled really hard”, as she puts it, Kari Lake did some soul searching. In 2019 a hot mic had caught Ms Lake—then a veteran television newsreader in Phoenix, Arizona—crudely dismissing concerns about her presence on Parler, a right-wing social network. “Fuck them,” she said of her detractors. “They’re 20-year-old dopes.”

After the tape leaked, the dopes called for Ms Lake to be fired. She spent a week off the air, but her unease only grew. She turned to God. She started comparing the Bible she kept on one side of her desk with the news scripts she kept on the other. Eventually, she quit broadcasting altogether, saying she was through with “having to read news that I felt wasn’t fully truthful”. Shortly thereafter she announced her candidacy as a Republican for governor of Arizona, in a video produced by her husband, a videographer with a penchant for soft-focus backgrounds.

Ms Lake enjoys a slight lead over her lacklustre Democratic opponent, Katie Hobbs, ahead of Tuesday’s election. She is revelling in her cancellation. Ms Lake frequently peddles the lie that the 2020 election was stolen, earning Donald Trump’s approval. She describes immigration on Arizona’s southern border as an “invasion”. She has accused Ms Hobbs of supporting sex education for youngsters and opposing medical care for infants who survive abortion attempts. Both characterisations are misleading. But unlike many of Mr Trump’s acolytes, she is fully media-trained. Glenn Beck, a right-wing radio host, compares her speaking talent to that of Ronald Reagan. Ms Hobbs refuses to debate her—no doubt for fear of getting shown up.

Critics spy opportunism in Ms Lake’s recent political awakening. She says no politician since Reagan has thrilled her like Mr Trump, yet she voted for Barack Obama in 2008. She calls herself Christian from birth, and dismisses rumours that she dabbled in Buddhism. (The yoga was for stress relief, she says.) If she can convince Arizona voters that she is the real deal, the Lake playbook—ultra-smooth delivery of far-right talking points—could be a winner. Democrats are rightly worried.

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist.

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown the winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Large company drunkenly neglect a room (12)

1 across Middle of spectrum contains colour I recognise (6)

2 across Australian individual produces pungent gas (5)

3 across Entrepreneur operates partly in the continent (6)

Factual clues

1 down A business often beset by bloating and egomania (12)

1 across It underwrote Lula’s previous Latin American policy (6)

2 across This shield organisms from harmful ultraviolet radiation (5)

3 across Where even a recession might not reduce inflation (6)


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Yasumasa Watanabe, Tokyo, Japan

North America: Cathy Adams, Burlington, Canada

Central and South America: Silvia Mora Bowen, Quito, Ecuador

Europe: Agnieszka Bugajska, Krakow, Poland

Africa: Hassan Alaoui Abdallaoui, Rabat, Morocco

Oceania: Warren Twohey, Auckland, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of Luke, Empire State, Napoleon Solo, The Maltese Falcon and force. The theme is Star Wars: Luke Skywalker, the Empire Strikes Back, Han Solo, Millennium Falcon and the “force”.

He that would enjoy life and act with freedom must have the work of the day continually before his eyes.

James Clerk Maxwell
