The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 14, 2023
America’s Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation will once more try to find a buyer for Silicon Valley Bank after the first auction got no takers acceptable to regulators, according to the Wall Street Journal. No big banks bid in the first auction, which closed on Sunday. Other mid-tier banks’ share prices plunged amid fears that they would also face a run. First Republic’s fell by nearly 62% on Monday.

America, Australia and Britain announced new details of their AUKUS defence pact. Australia will buy three of America’s Virginia-class nuclear-powered submarines with an option to buy two more. Meanwhile BAE Systems and Rolls-Royce, both British firms, will help build a new submarine model for use by Australia. Suffused with American technology, the “SSN-AUKUS” will not be ready until the late 2030s.

Britain’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, pledged to increase defence spending by nearly £5bn ($6.1bn) over the next two years. Of that £3bn will go towards Britain’s nuclear capabilities and submarine programme; the rest towards replenishing stockpiles of weapons drawn down during the war in Ukraine. Motivating the investment, the government said, was the “epoch-defining challenge” posed by China.

The Biden administration approved a vast oil-drilling project operated by ConocoPhillips on federal land in Alaska. Environmentalists had vociferously lobbied against the project, which is known as Willow and is set to produce up to 180,000 barrels of crude a day. But ever since the war in Ukraine pushed up energy prices, Joe Biden has been keen to spur drilling.

Pfizer purchased Seagen, an American biotech company focused on oncology, for $43bn at $229 a share, a 33% premium on Friday’s closing price. Pfizer is using its windfall profits from its covid vaccines to diversify away from such treatments as demand for them recedes. The American drugmaker hopes to grow Seagen’s expected revenues from $2.2bn in 2023 to $10bn by 2030.

Porsche posted bumper profits of €6.7bn ($7.2bn) in 2022, a 27% increase on the previous year. The German luxury carmaker has been riding high since it became the most valuable carmaker in Europe, overtaking its parent company Volkswagen, after a blockbuster IPO in 2022. The firm said they expected similar levels of profit in 2023, unless the “challenging conditions” in the economy took a nosedive.

Britain’s Office for National Statistics removed digital cameras, certain CDs, alcopops (colourful low-alcoholic beverages) and other relics of a bygone era from its basket of goods and services used to calculate inflation. Products like vegan spreads, e-bikes and frozen berries have replaced them. The new basket will inform Britain’s February inflation data, which will be released on March 22nd.

Fact of the day: 10%, the fall in enrolment in New York City’s public schools in the three years since the pandemic started. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Banking stocks in turmoil
The fallout from Silicon Valley Bank’s collapse is reverberating through markets. Other American regional lenders have been hit especially hard. On Monday two of them, First Republic Bank and Western Alliance Bank, saw their share prices fall by more than 61% and 47% respectively. For these and a clutch of other mid-tier banking stocks, trading was punctuated through the day by repeated pauses due to high volatility. The jitters have spread across the world: Europe’s Stoxx index of bank share prices was down by 7% on Monday.

SVB was brought down by loading up on long-term securities, the value of which fell as interest rates rose; one fear is that after years of low rates others have been similarly reckless. Another concerns an old central-banking adage: that to quell inflation, the Federal Reserve must tighten monetary policy until something breaks. Contagion from SVB may be contained, but its failure suggests that the breakage phase is under way.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The EU’s green-subsidy bonanza
“Europe will be forged in crisis, and will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those crises,” wrote Jean Monnet, a founding father of the EU, in the 1970s. European leaders are about to attempt an ambitious iteration of that routine by tackling three challenges simultaneously. Their proposed solutions will reshape the EU’s economic policy.

A new legislative proposal from the European Commission, to be unveiled in the coming days, will take on climate change, Europe’s reliance on Chinese exports (especially goods like solar panels) and America’s increasingly protectionist industrial policy (largely via the Inflation Reduction Act).

The proposal, which must be discussed and adopted by national leaders, will seek to boost European production of green technologies—such as solar panels, electrolysers and heat pumps—probably via subsidies, and to speed up their deployment. That may sound innocuous. But it would require the EU to ease its hard-fought restrictions on state aid. In forging a Europe ready for the future, policymakers risk undermining its foundations.


PHOTO: AP
San Francisco debates reparations for black residents
Reparations for slavery, under debate in America, are meant to acknowledge both the horrors of the slave trade and its legacy of racial discrimination. In 2019, Evanston, Illinois became the first city to approve a limited government-run reparations scheme, which will distribute $10m over ten years.

On Tuesday, San Francisco’s city council will hold its first public hearing about planned reparations to black residents harmed by past discriminatory policies. The committee that drafted the plan suggests the city should pay each eligible resident $5m, and create housing, education and health policies to tackle racial disparities.

Slavery was never legal in California, but committee members argue that the city owes black San Franciscans compensation for generations of discrimination. City officials seem unlikely to adopt the costly plan. The Hoover Institution, a conservative think-tank, estimates that the lump sums alone could cost the city, already operating with a budget deficit, up to $175bn. And details of how the scheme would be funded are scant.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
How Russia divides the world
On Tuesday Sergei Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, will attend the inaugural meeting of the International Russophile Movement in Moscow. The organisation, which is linked to Tsargrad, a right-wing, Russian-Orthodox media group, aims to promote Russian culture and society abroad. Mr Lavrov’s spokesperson claims it will counteract the West’s “anti-Russia campaign”, and that delegates from “several dozen” countries will attend.

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has seen it cast as an international pariah by many—but not all. Earlier this month only five countries (Belarus, Eritrea, Syria, North Korea and Russia itself) rejected a resolution in the UN General Assembly condemning the invasion, out of 181 that voted. But 35 others abstained, including China and India. Moreover, a study of global polling data by the University of Cambridge suggests that in some parts of the world, notably South and South-East Asia, as well as sub-Saharan Africa, public perceptions of Russia remain broadly positive. In such places, the information war still rages.


PHOTO: ALAMY
A hit football TV series returns
Since 2020 “Ted Lasso”, a television series, has offered viewers a cheerful depiction of English football. Ted is an out-of-his-depth American coach hired to run AFC Richmond, a fictional Premier League club. For two series he won over his detractors with little more than kindness and southern charm, motivating players with a homemade sign reading “Believe”. His star players are generally decent.

Season three, released on Apple TV+ on Wednesday, introduces a touch more realism. Nate, a status-obsessed former assistant coach at Richmond, has taken charge at West Ham, a rival (and real) English club. He humiliates his players and takes potshots at Ted in the press. But Ted rises above the petty rivalry.

Yet “Ted Lasso” remains a feel-good comedy, skipping any mention of the human-rights violations, sexual-assault charges or dodgy financial dealings that dog the real sport. Perhaps the writers want viewers to believe that a better way is possible.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Tuesday: Japan abolished which hereditary caste of military nobility in 1876?

Monday: In Norse mythology, which figures guide the souls of the dead to Valhalla?

One can never consent to creep when one feels an impulse to soar.

Helen Keller
