The world in brief
April 28, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

America’s GDP grew by less than expected in the first quarter of 2023 as higher interest rates weighed on the world’s largest economy. Preliminary figures showed that GDP grew by 1.1% in annualised terms in the quarter, compared with a consensus forecast of 2%. The Federal Reserve is expected to raise rates again next week.

The Rapid Support Forces, a Sudanese militia, agreed to a three-day extension of a ceasefire with the army shortly before it was due to expire. Despite the truce, clashes continue to break out across the country. Countries have rushed to evacuate their citizens from Sudan.

Amazon’s share price leapt in post-session trading after the e-emporium said that first-quarter sales rose by 9% year over year, to $127.4bn. Net income was $3.2bn, nearly 50% above forecasts. To boost profitability Amazon has sacked thousands of workers and paused construction on its second headquarters near Washington, DC.

Iran seized an oil tanker travelling in international waters in the Gulf of Oman, according to America’s navy, amid rising maritime tensions in the region. Iranian state media acknowledged the taking of a ship registered to the Marshall Islands, a country in the Pacific. America called Iran’s persistent harassment of commercial vessels a “threat to maritime security and the global economy”.

OPEC’s secretary-general, Haitham Al Ghais, accused the director of the International Energy Agency of stoking “volatility” amid a disagreement about the outlook for the oil market. On Wednesday Faith Birol warned that cutting oil production to boost oil prices risked fuelling inflation. Mr Al Ghais called that stance “erroneous” and a danger to global economic growth.

Finland’s prime minister-elect, Petteri Orpo of the centre-right National Coalition party, will begin coalition talks next week with three parties, including the hard-right Finns. The anti-immigrant, Eurosceptic Finns placed second in recent parliamentary elections, winning two fewer seats than the NCP. Immigration will probably be a sticking point: the NCP campaigned for more arrivals to help the labour market.

Europe’s commercial property market slumped to its lowest level in 11 years in the first quarter of 2023 as concerns over the economy, banking sector and higher interest rates hit dealmaking. Data from MSCI, an analyst, showed that investors made deals worth €36.5bn ($40bn) in the three months to March, 62% lower than the same period last year. Paris overtook London as the region’s investment hotspot.

Fact of the day: 125, the number of combat-capable aircraft Ukraine had at the start of the war. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Sudan goes from truce to truce
Another day, another ceasefire in Sudan. Since fighting began in Khartoum, the capital, 13 days ago, four ceasefires have been agreed and broken. The most recent was extended on Thursday by three days.

Both sides of the armed forces battling for control of the country—the national army and the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary unit that grew out of the violent Janjaweed militias—have been blamed for sporadic fighting during the ceasefire. The army continues to pound the city with airstrikes. The RSF’s forces have been taking over homes for use as fortifications.

Whole districts of the capital have been reduced to ashes, and hundreds of civilians have been killed. And though the next ceasefire might fare better, fighting beyond the capital, especially in West Darfur, appears to be intensifying.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
New York’s budget blues
Andrew Cuomo, who stepped down as governor of New York in 2021, allegedly bullied lawmakers to pass his budgets. Kathy Hochul, his more agreeable successor, has hit a snag. Her $227bn budget has been held up by legislators beyond the April 1st deadline. Operating extensions have allowed workers to continue getting paid; if a deal is not reached by Friday, another extension will be granted.

The delay speaks to the divisions within the state Democratic party. The two main remaining sticking points are not about money. First, Ms Hochul, a moderate, wants to rework recent reforms which reduced the use of cash bail. Progressives fear that her proposal to give judges more discretion could hurt the poor. She also wants to lift caps on the number of charter schools (independently-run public schools), irking teachers’ unions. But the budget delay does not trouble Ms Hochul. “I’m more concerned about getting the right results,” she said earlier in April.


PHOTO: REUTERS
ExxonMobil’s still-mighty profits
On Friday ExxonMobil will release its earnings for the first quarter. Profits will probably fall lower than last year’s records—but the pipeline looks healthy.

America’s largest oil-and-gas company forecasts operating profits of $9.6bn for the period, down from the $12.8bn net profit reported in the fourth quarter of 2022. That is largely because global oil prices, which averaged $100 a barrel last year, now hover around $80, thanks, in part, to a slowing world economy.

But the firm can still keep healthy margins. It is selling costly businesses, such as a refinery in Washington state, which make too little money, and replacing them with low-cost production assets. These include wells in the Permian basin, and fresh investments in Guyana and Suriname, where it recently discovered promising reserves. It also suits ExxonMobil that the rest of the industry is investing too little to meet future demand, which should continue to support prices. Expect the firm to keep on pumping profits.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
Bank of Japan’s governor starts on a low
Ueda Kazuo presides over his first policy meeting as governor of the Bank of Japan on Thursday and Friday. Mr Ueda, an academic economist, takes over at a precarious juncture. Headline inflation in Japan passed 4% in December, a forty-year high. The BoJ’s previous leadership reckoned the price growth was transitory, and kept its policy loose, maintaining negative interest rates and its policy of “yield-curve control”, a cap on ten-year government-bond yields. Buying bonds to maintain the cap has cost the bank dearly.

Most analysts do not expect Mr Ueda to change rates at his first meeting. He signalled as much in parliament on April 24th, when he declared that inflation was projected to fall below its 2% target by next year. He said that Japan “must maintain monetary easing”. Nonetheless, Mr Ueda is expected to eventually scrap the bank’s costly yield-curve controls. When that happens is less clear—to avoid triggering a sell-off, the timing will probably be a surprise.



PHOTO:
A watchmaker’s history of time
In 1783, an admirer of Marie Antoinette commissioned Abraham-Louis Breguet, a Parisian horologist, to make her a spectacular pocket watch. Ten years into the task Breguet was tipped off that revolutionaries had earmarked him for the guillotine. He escaped but kept working on his creation. His workshop finally finished it four years after his death—long after the French queen lost her head. In 1999 Breguet’s company became the luxury division of Swatch, a Swiss watchmaker.

In “Hands of Time”, published on Thursday, Rebecca Struthers, a watchmaker, uses such details to show how the history of the timepiece was driven by technological innovation, artistic taste and the forces of history. Royalty, engineers and artisans shaped the device’s development; so, too, did empire-building and warfare. Ms Struthers also charts people’s relationship with time itself—from church towers announcing it from on high, to democratised time, worn on wrists or displayed on phones. Her book is a reminder of why the word “time” is the most commonly used noun in the English language.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which British prime minister pushed through the Great Reform Act of 1832?

Thursday: Which daisy-like flower gets its name from the Greek for “earth apple”?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Carlos Sangil, Madrid, Spain

Shweta Sharma, Gurugram, India

David Hill, Portland, United States

They all gave the correct answers of electric cars, enigma, robot and Sahara. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

People in their right minds never take pride in their talents.

Harper Lee
