The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (03:41 GMT+1 / 10:41 Hong Kong)

American stockmarkets fell, as investors’ fear of recession grew following the Federal Reserve’s largest interest-rate rise since 1994. It raised interest rates by three-quarters of a percentage point, and it expects its target rate to rise to at least 3% this year. The Fed took action after disappointing data on inflation.

The Bank of England increased interest rates by 0.25 percentage points, and forecasted a steep decline in GDP growth. It also predicted that unemployment would rise to 5.5% in 2025, up from 3.8% today. Some on the bank’s monetary policy committee pushed for a higher rate increase, of 0.5 percentage points, but with inflation forecast to peak at the end of the year the doves won out.

The leaders of France, Germany and Italy endorsed Ukraine’s bid to join the EU during a visit to Kyiv. It is the first time any of them has visited the capital since Russia’s invasion. France and Germany also agreed to Ukraine’s plea for more weapons, while America promised another $1bn in military aid. Meanwhile, Russia's forces continued to attack Severodonetsk as it seeks to capture the entire Donbas region.

America’s congressional committee investigating the Capitol riot of January 6th 2021 heard how Donald Trump tried to pressure his vice-president, Mike Pence, into overturning the results of the 2020 election. Two former advisers to Mr Pence testified. In its third hearing since last week, the panel tied the pressure campaign to violence on the day: Mr Trump’s supporters chanted “hang Mike Pence” as they stormed the Capitol building, where the vice-president was preparing to certify Joe Biden’s victory.

Germany asked its citizens to conserve energy because Russia has reduced the supply of gas across Europe. In an appeal posted on Twitter Robert Habeck, the deputy chancellor, said that “every kilowatt hour helps”. Gazprom, Russia’s state-controlled energy exporter, has cut gas flows through the Nord Stream pipeline by 60% in recent days, blaming slow repairs; Germany says the cuts are politically motivated.

Police in Brazil extracted a confession from a man arrested in connection with the disappearance of two men in the Amazon’s Javari valley on June 5th: Dom Phillips, a British journalist; and Bruno Pereira, an expert on the region’s “uncontacted” peoples. The suspect admitted to shooting and killing them both, having clashed with Mr Pereira over the locals’ fishing rights.

Wildfires in northern Spain incinerated around 1,100 hectares of woods, amid a heatwave that is sending temperatures near to record highs. The blazes in Catalonia started on Wednesday; hundreds of firefighters were called to the scene to try and limit the fires’ spread.

Fact of the day: $800m, the forecast size of Japan’s CBD market in 2024, up from $59m in 2019. Read the full article

Ukraine’s bid to join the EU

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has nudged Sweden and Finland towards NATO. It may also have started to open the European Union’s doors to Ukraine. On Thursday Ukraine’s bid to become an official EU candidate, the first step on the road to full membership, won the backing of France, Germany and Italy. On Friday the European Commission is likely to follow suit. Next week the EU’s 27 heads of government will meet to discuss Ukraine’s bid (along with that of Moldova, Georgia and others). All must give the green light for it to proceed.

But negotiating full membership could take a decade or more. Ukraine’s allies argue it deserves special consideration, but others are reluctant to ease the usual exacting requirements. Long-suffering Balkan aspirants such as Serbia and Montenegro will be furious at any hint of queue-jumping. Ukrainians should prepare for a long, difficult slog.

A global taxation agreement inches closer

PHOTO: EYEVINE
For years governments have struggled to close the gap between the places where multinationals do business and where they book profits. Companies increasingly create value via hard-to-measure activities such as R&D and software, which makes it easier to cut their overall tax bills by reporting profits in low-tax jurisdictions. But change is afoot.

On Friday the finance ministers of the EU's 27 governments will discuss how to codify an agreement that no multinational corporation should pay less than 15% tax anywhere in the world. Last year the G20, a club of the world’s biggest economies, agreed to similar rules. In theory, such a provision would reduce the gains to firms from siphoning away profits to havens. The extra revenues would also be useful for cash-strapped governments. But such an arrangement would hurt countries that have benefited from low-tax regimes, such as Ireland. Plenty of taxing work lies ahead.

The resurgence of Greece’s far right

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As Greece’s economy collapsed in the 2010s, the far right surged. The swastika-like emblem of Golden Dawn, an extremist party, along with torchlit parades and attacks against immigrants, struck a chord with a segment of the electorate. In 2015 they made Golden Dawn the third largest party in Parliament. But in 2020 the party’s leaders were convicted of running a criminal organisation under the guise of a political party. On Wednesday their appeals began, but were immediately adjourned as judges considered a postponement request by Nikos Michaloliakos, Golden Dawn’s anti-vax founder, who is recovering from covid-19. The hearings will resume on July 6th.

Yet Greece’s far right is far from moribund. Ilias Kasidiaris, Golden Dawn’s former deputy boss and one of those convicted in 2020, runs a new extreme nationalist party from behind bars which may find a way to participate in next year’s general election. Meanwhile Greek Solution, the only far-right party still in parliament, is making gains among low-income voters as Greece’s economy wobbles again. The future may offer a grim echo of the recent past.

India aims for an EU trade deal

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Indian exports are booming. In May $62bn-worth of goods and services were sold abroad, up 24% compared with the same period last year. The government hopes annual exports will reach $1trn by 2030, an increase of 250% from 2021’s figure. But that will depend on whether it can secure bilateral free-trade agreements. India is already negotiating with Britain. But a bigger prize awaits in the form of the European Union, India’s third-largest trade partner. On Friday an Indian delegation will travel to Brussels, hoping to kickstart a conversation.

Much could be gained. Both sides want to diversify their supply chains away from China. The EU has aggressively courted India since war broke out in Ukraine, eager to wean it away from Russia. The two sides aim to bash out a deal by 2024, but discussions will be fraught on issues from agriculture to intellectual property. The last time the pair sat down for talks, in 2007, they dragged on for six years—before fizzling.


The end of the English bulldog?

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Few breeds of dog are more emblematic of their homeland than the English bulldog. Its squashed face and Churchillian jowls have proven enduringly popular. But these extreme features, for which bulldogs have been intensively bred, are taking a toll, says research in Canine Medicine and Genetics, a journal. The study analysed the veterinary records of tens of thousands of canines, several thousand bulldogs among them. Compared with the rest, English bulldogs were twice as likely to be diagnosed with a wide range of health disorders.

The poor pooches are particularly prone to conditions like dermatitis (in skin folds) and breathing problems (induced by their odd-shaped skulls). The authors call for a change in breeding standards, and say buyers should stop prizing extreme canine characteristics. Otherwise, Britain may have to join Norway and the Netherlands in banning English bulldogs—and condemn a national symbol to exile.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which French politician was responsible for the creation of the Fifth Republic?

Thursday: Which jazz musician appeared in the films “High Society” and “Hello Dolly”?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Cheng Eng Aun, Singapore

Rebecca Clements, Toronto, Canada

Sebastian Agudelo-Restrepo, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic

Giedrius Kazakevicius, Vilnius, Lithuania

Max Yuao Li, Christchurch, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of Lysychansk, Leeds, coca and Kabul. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

The better you hear a thing put, the more certain you are there's another view.

Dorothy Richardson
