The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (21:26 GMT+1 / 04:26 Hong Kong)

Russia announced plans for a series of referendums to formally annex four separatist-ruled regions of Ukraine. Russian-installed officials in Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhia, which make up 15% of Ukrainian territory, said residents would vote on joining Russia between September 23rd and 27th. America immediately said it would not recognise the results; Ukraine’s foreign minister called the move a “sham”. On Tuesday evening Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, had been expected to give his first televised address since Russia invaded Ukraine in February, but failed to appear.

The lower house of Russia’s parliament passed a bill mandating harsher penalties for desertion and refusal to fight—for the first time including crimes committed during “mobilisation, martial law and wartime”. The bill could be approved by the upper house as early as Wednesday. Mr Putin urgently needs more manpower for his flagging campaign in Ukraine. Russian paratroopers currently stationed in Syria will be transferred to the frontline, the Kyiv Independent reported.

World leaders met in New York at the UN General Assembly, the annual UN summit, held in person for the first time in three years. Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s president, was the first head of state to deliver his address. Participants at the summit face a daunting list of challenges; António Guterres, the UN’s secretary-general, said there should be “no illusions” about the difficulties ahead.

Protests erupted across Iran over the death of a young Kurdish woman, Mahsa Amini, who died in police custody last week after being arrested for wearing her hijab incorrectly. In Iran’s Kurdistan province security forces opened fire on demonstrators. At least four were killed, according to a rights group, while another 85 were injured and 200 arrested. During the protests some women have been burning their headscarves.

Violence broke out in the West Bank towns of Nablus and Jenin between security forces of the Palestinian Authority and supporters of the Islamist group Hamas. On Monday troops of the Palestinian Authority, which is controlled by Hamas’s rival, Fatah, entered Nablus and arrested Musab Shtayyeh, a Hamas commander wanted by Israel, which insists the PA must do more to crack down on militants.

Hurricane Fiona made landfall in the Dominican Republic. Torrential rain and winds of 90mph (145kph) forced roads and businesses to close in the east of the Caribbean country. The hurricane is forecast to strengthen as it travels towards the Turks and Caicos Islands. Over the weekend the storm battered neighbouring Puerto Rico, killing several people, cutting off power to 1.3m of the territory’s residents and leaving 70% without potable water.

China kept its benchmark lending rates unchanged—despite the yuan’s weakening in recent weeks and central banks’ tightening monetary policy elsewhere. Officials decided not to increase one- and five-year loan prime rates as they try to find a balance between supporting an economic recovery and bolstering the yuan.

Another jumbo rate rise from the Fed

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As recently as the start of June, it seemed inconceivable to most investors that the Federal Reserve would raise interest rates by three-quarters of a percentage point, a jumbo increase by modern standards. But on Wednesday it is expected to announce its third consecutive increase of that magnitude. If so, the Fed will have lifted short-term interest rates from 0% in March to 3% today, its sharpest monetary tightening in four decades.

Frustratingly, there is scant evidence that the Fed’s hawkishness has reined in inflation. Consumer prices in August were up by 8.3% compared with a year earlier. So some think the Fed may opt for an even bigger rate increase. But others worry that it is at risk of over-tightening, and damaging growth. No matter: the Fed is unlikely to relent until it sees clear signs that inflation is receding.

What next for Ukraine and Russia?

PHOTO: PRESS ASSOCIATION
Ukraine’s army, having swept through Kharkiv province in the north-east, is still probing Russian lines. On Monday it announced the capture of Bilohorivka, in Luhansk province. The advance is symbolically important, as it denies Russia full control of the province the Kremlin claimed to have conquered in early July. The twin cities of Lysychansk and Severodonetsk lie less than 20km to the east.

Russian officials have responded by accelerating plans to absorb Luhansk and next-door Donetsk province into Russia. On Tuesday officials from the Russian puppet regimes in those provinces announced that referendums—widely expected to be rigged— would be held from September 23rd to 27th.

Meanwhile, on Wednesday Russia’s parliament could pass a new law enabling harsher punishments for soldiers who surrender or disobey orders. “Mobilisation, martial law and wartime”—three things that Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president has avoided declaring so far—are listed as aggravating factors. That suggests they may be on the way.


An awkward anniversary in the Philippines

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Every year, on September 21st, survivors of the cruel, corrupt regime of Ferdinand Marcos, the late ex-president of the Philippines, commemorate the anniversary of his declaration of martial law in 1972. That move transformed him into an autocrat. Their remembrances on Wednesday promise to be more heartfelt than usual. That is both because this year is the 50th anniversary of the declaration, and because Marcos’s son, Ferdinand “Bongbong” Marcos, now occupies the office his father once did.

In May, an electorate mostly too young to remember the older regime voted overwhelmingly to make Bongbong president. Survivors of the father’s violent enormities were horrified. Yet anxiety among the opposition that a tendency towards autocracy runs in the Marcos blood seems unfounded, so far. The younger Mr Marcos’s behaviour since his inauguration in June suggests he believes that the best way for him to rehabilitate the Marcos dynasty is to respect the very democratic constitution written after a popular uprising overthrew his father in 1986.

Brazil’s economy, ahead of its election

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Analysts expect policymakers at Brazil’s central bank meeting on Wednesday to keep the country’s key interest rate unchanged at 13.75%. The worst of Brazil’s economic woes seem to be over. Having risen steadily since June 2020, monthly inflation fell in July and August. GDP grew by 1.2% in the second quarter compared with the first. The unemployment rate, which reached nearly 15% in 2021, has fallen to just above 9%.

President Jair Bolsonaro, who is seeking re-election on October 2nd, claims that Brazil has emerged from the pandemic with a “thriving economy”. But that may be premature. Economists polled by the central bank expect the economy to grow by 2.7% in 2022, but by just 0.5% in 2023, as emergency spending fades away. Either way, Mr Bolsonaro’s boasts do not seem to have borne political fruit. Polls find the president trailing the opposition candidate and former president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, by 12 percentage points.

Most people with dementia get no support

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
At least 55m people worldwide are estimated to have dementia, a number expected to reach 139m-150m by 2050. Dementia, which may begin as a few “senior moments” but progress to utter helplessness requiring 24-hour care, is incurable. But it can be alleviated. Yet the vast majority with the condition receive little or no support from their governments. So says the latest report, published on Wednesday, of Alzheimer’s Disease International, an umbrella group for more than 100 national associations around the world. (The organisation is named for the disease that is the most common cause of dementia.)

The report includes a survey suggesting that, of those diagnosed with dementia, 37% in rich countries and 45% in lower-income countries receive no support after diagnosis. It is left to their families to look after them. And these are in a sense the lucky ones: three-quarters of dementia cases are undiagnosed. That leaves more than 45m people with dementia receiving no professional help.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which politicians led the Labour party to disastrous defeat in the 1983 British general election?

Tuesday: What in maths is defined as “the number of different digits that a system of counting uses to represent numbers”?

Our true nationality is mankind.

H.G. Wells