The world in brief
Spetember 15, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The death toll in the flooded city of Derna skyrocketed to at least 11,300, according to the Libyan Red Crescent; 10,000 are still missing. Storm Daniel caused severe flooding and burst two dams near Derna as it swept through the eastern part of Libya on Sunday night. The city has already buried three thousand of its dead, mainly in mass graves. In a rare sign of unity, the country’s two squabbling governments have co-ordinated their relief efforts. A UN official said that the country could have “avoided most of the human casualties” if “proper services”, for instance emergency warnings, had been in place.

Shares in Arm had climbed to almost 25% above their offer price of $51 when trading closed on America’s Nasdaq exchange, valuing the British chip-designer at over $65bn. Arm, owned by SoftBank, a Japanese technology conglomerate, unveiled the biggest IPO of the year so far on Wednesday. SoftBank has sold over 95m shares, representing 10% of Arm’s equity.

Hunter Biden, the son of America’s President Joe Biden, was indicted on federal charges, including lying about his use of crack cocaine when buying a gun. A previous plea deal, in which Mr Biden would plead guilty to tax-related misdemeanours but could avoid the gun charge, fell through in July. That offence carries a maximum sentence of ten years’ imprisonment.

China’s central bank cut the amount of money that the country’s lenders are required to hold in reserve by 0.25 percentage points. The reduction, which begins on Friday, aims to boost Chinese lending, particularly to local authorities trying to fund infrastructure projects. China’s economy, hit by weak global demand and an ailing housing sector, has struggled since the covid-19 pandemic.

The European Central Bank raised interest rates by 0.25 percentage points, bringing the deposit rate to a record 4%. Inflation in the euro zone was at 5.3% in August, well above the ECB’s annual target of 2%. But with Europe’s economy faltering, rate-setters may pause next time they meet. The bank lowered its growth projections for the bloc to 0.7% this year and 1% in 2024.

A court in Bangladesh sentenced two human-rights activists to two years in jail for publishing false information, in a trial regarded as a crackdown on dissent. Adilur Rahman Khan and Nasiruddin Elan worked for Odhikar, which records extrajudicial killings and police violence. Bangladesh’s economy has flourished under Sheikh Hasina, the long-serving prime minister, but that is being threatened by her increasingly authoritarian tendencies.

Electricity suppliers in Nigeria announced a “total system collapse” after a fire on a crucial transmission line plunged much of the country into a blackout. On Thursday morning Nigeria’s grid was producing no power; it was restored after 10 hours. Nigeria suffers from an unstable power supply, in 2022 the grid broke down at least four times.

Figure of the day: 15, the number of the EU's 27 member states where hard-right parties have support of 20% or more. Read the full story.


PHOTO: EPA
Has China’s economy bottomed out?
After four grim months for China’s economy—in which the property market slumped, exports shrank, prices fell and youth unemployment soared—is the bottom near? Data released so far this month has been mildly encouraging. Consumer prices stopped falling in August (although underlying deflationary pressure remains). Exports improved, compared with the previous month. Credit growth also beat low expectations.

Other figures released later on Friday might show an improvement in industrial production and infrastructure investment. Retail sales will be mixed: the post-pandemic boom in catering may be coming to an end, even as car sales pick up. The biggest question mark is the property market, where sales have yet to stabilise.

And what about youth unemployment? It usually improves in August as youngsters who graduated a month or two before finally land a job. Unfortunately, any such improvement this year will remain invisible, because China has stopped publishing the figures. China’s infuriating opacity masks good news as well as bad.



PHOTO: EPA
Cuba plays host to the G77
Rarely does Cuba have the kind of international prominence it will on Friday. A two-day summit of the G77 (named after the original number of members, now made up of 134 developing states), and China, will discuss issues in the global south such as climate change. Leaders including Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the president of Brazil, and António Guterres, the UN secretary general, will take part.

Hosting is a coup for Cuba’s president, Miguel Díaz-Canel. But it is unclear whether anything will result from the chinwag, which is designed to give the countries a stronger voice on the global stage. Mr Díaz-Canel may be hoping for more technology know-how and help, from China in particular, for his country’s ailing economy. But China has shown some impatience with its Caribbean ally’s reluctance to reform in exchange for cash. Like India, China will not send its president, nor foreign minister. Cuba is merely getting Xi Li, the head of China’s anti-corruption watchdog.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Christian conservatives assemble in DC
On Friday American conservatives will gather in Washington, DC, for “Pray Vote Stand”, a “summit” hosted by the Family Research Council, an evangelical-Christian anti-abortion group. The conference, marketed as a space for “spiritually active, governance engaged conservatives”, kicks off with a ride on a prayer bus and includes sessions on “the gender battle” and “de-woking the Pentagon”. Donald Trump, Ron DeSantis and Mike Pence, candidates for the Republican presidential nomination, are scheduled to speak.

The religious right are important voters for Republicans. In the 2020 presidential election around 75% of the country’s white evangelicals supported Mr Trump. The former president is leading the Republican primary polls by a mile, leaving little time for Mr DeSantis, who is campaigning on culture-war issues such as abortion, guns and gender identity, or Mr Pence, an evangelical himself, to close the gap. The primaries begin in January; an impressive showing at the summit could be an answer to their prayers.


PHOTO: AP
Human rights on trial in Russia
On Friday the latest hearing in the trial of Oleg Orlov, one of Russia’s most prominent civic activists, will take place in Moscow. Mr Orlov is best known as a leading member of Memorial, an NGO dedicated to preserving the memory of Stalinist repression and advocating for human rights. In December 2021 a court ordered the liquidation of the group, which Russia authorities dubbed a “foreign agent.” In 2022 Memorial shared the Nobel Peace Prize with watchdogs for civil liberties in Belarus and Ukraine.

Mr Orlov was arrested in March on charges of “discrediting” Russia’s armed forces. The authorities cited an anti-war article he wrote for a French media outlet. There is little prospect that Russia’s government-controlled courts will find him anything other than guilty, a verdict that could see Mr Orlov spend up to three years in prison. The Kremlin is determined to destroy any trace of Memorial—and the ideas it represented.


PHOTO: STEFAN HOEDERATH
The first Namibian opera
Eslon Hindundu, a Namibian musician, was 16 when he heard his first opera, Pietro Mascagni’s “Cavalleria Rusticana”. On Friday the composer and choral director, now 27, unveils the European premiere of the first ever Namibian opera.

Mr Hindundu worked with Kim Mira Meyer, a German opera director, to create “Chief Hijangua,” the story of a lovelorn prince whose life is blighted by Germany’s colonial occupation of his homeland. After a debut in Namibia’s capital, Windhoek, and three performances in Berlin, it will tour elsewhere in Germany next year.

The collaboration fuses African and operatic traditions. Young African soloists and a mixed choir from Berlin and Namibia sing in German and Otjiherero, a language spoken by Namibia’s Herero people. Dancers, puppets and masks representing the dead forge a powerful allegory of the genocide of the Herero people by the German invaders. The ending is inevitably tragic, but Mr Hindundu’s operatic career is off to a fine start.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which Joni Mitchell album is regularly voted by critics as one of the greatest of all time?

Thursday: Which character was played by John Boyega in the later Star Wars films?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Andres Varela, Singapore
Nu Fate, Chicago, Illinois, America
James Salvin-Keech, Inverurie, Scotland

They all gave the correct answers of Belt and Road, Budget, Noise and Donbas. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

All greatness of character is dependent on individuality.

James Fenimore Cooper
