The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 21, 2023

President Joe Biden made a surprise visit to Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, to meet with his counterpart, Volodymyr Zelensky. The trip was Mr Biden’s first to Ukraine since Russia invaded almost a year ago. Pledging to support Ukraine’s war effort “for as long as it takes”, Mr Biden promised a new delivery of military equipment including Javelin anti-tank missiles and radars.

A 6.3 magnitude earthquake and powerful aftershocks struck Hatay province in southern Turkey, where devastating 7.8 and 7.5 magnitude quakes hit two weeks ago. Turkish officials said that three people died and 213 were injured. The epicentre was Antakya, where some remaining buildings were damaged; most residents were staying in temporary tents.

Thirty-four countries questioned whether Russian and Belarusian athletes should compete as “neutrals” at the next Olympics, as the organisation in charge of the games had suggested, and urged their exclusion in a statement. Signatories including America, Britain and France—which is hosting the 2024 event in Paris—doubted whether those countries’ athletes could really be considered neutral “when they are directly funded and supported by their states”.

Archbishops representing ten of 42 provinces in the Anglican Communion said they no longer recognise the Archbishop of Canterbury as their leader after the Church of England backed blessings for same-sex couples. The discontented primates, all from the global south, claim to represent three-quarters of Anglicans. In the loosely organised Anglican faith, the head of the Church of England is considered “first among equals”.

Tens of thousands of Israelis protested in cities across the country against the government’s formal introduction of a controversial legal-reform bill that would curb the power of the judiciary. Inside parliament, opposition lawmakers raised Israeli flags and shouted over the bill’s debate. Demonstrations have persisted for weeks; earlier, President Joe Biden rebuked the reforms.

The Netherlands warned that Russia has sought to sabotage Dutch energy infrastructure in the North Sea, including gas pipelines, wind farms and internet cables. A Dutch intelligence official said that a ship had been intercepted while mapping such infrastructure in recent months. Russia has denied involvement in the September bombing of Nord Stream 1 and 2, gas pipelines under the Baltic Sea.

Hong Kong announced plans to allow retail investors to trade in the two largest cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin and Ether. Financiers will now be able to trade cryptocurrencies on licensed exchanges; previously, they were forced to rely on unlicensed platforms. The changes will bring Hong Kong in line with its competitor Singapore, which has permitted retail cryptocurrency trading for years.

Fact of the day: 42%, the percentage of adults in America who are obese. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Putin speaks to Russia’s parliament
President Vladimir Putin will be studying this week’s diplomatic events in eastern Europe closely. On Monday his American counterpart, Joe Biden, made a surprise trip to Ukraine, his first visit since Russia’s invasion nearly a year ago. On Tuesday Mr Biden will give a speech in Warsaw, Poland’s capital, in which the White House says he will send a clear message to the Kremlin. He has already pledged more military equipment for Ukraine, including anti-tank missiles and radars.

At more or less the same time Mr Putin will also be speaking out, in his annual address to Russia’s parliament. He may feel obliged to respond to Mr Biden’s diplomatic jaunt. But anyone hoping for a dramatic announcement about the war will probably be disappointed. The Kremlin has instead promised no doubt riveting reflections on Russia’s economy and “social sphere”. And when Mr Putin does discuss Ukraine, he will surely repeat his favourite refrain—blaming the West for his decision to wage war.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Microsoft’s Activision bid goes to Brussels
Microsoft’s lawyers will meet EU antitrust officials at a closed hearing on Tuesday to defend the company’s plan to buy Activision Blizzard, a video-game maker. The proposed acquisition, for $69bn, is by far the biggest deal the gaming industry has ever seen, but it’s struggling to gain momentum. Like authorities in America and Britain, the European Commission worries that the deal could reduce competition, especially if Microsoft makes Activision’s games available only on its own cloud.

Yet European authorities may be more flexible than their American and British counterparts. America’s Federal Trade Commission has already filed a lawsuit to block the merger; Britain’s Competition and Markets Authority came squarely down against it in a provisional statement earlier this month. The commission, however, might accept a deal in which parts of Activision are spun off into separate companies, as Microsoft is likely to offer at the hearing. If the American tech giant can negotiate a deal with the EU, it could serve as a template for other regulators to follow.


PHOTO: REUTERS
The Walmart barometer
Walmart, an American supermarket giant, will report its fourth-quarter results on Tuesday. Analysts are expecting healthy year-on-year sales growth of around 4.4%. Walmart’s low prices have helped it perform better than its competitors at a time when consumers are being hurt by inflation. All the same, its results will be viewed as a barometer for the retail sector. Many other retailers have yet to report their results from last quarter, which includes the all-important Christmas shopping frenzy.

It has been a bumpy few years. A splurge on goods during lockdown began to diminish last year because of rising prices and a shift back towards spending on services, especially on hospitality and entertainment. That has forced many retailers to clear inventories at a discount, crimping margins. Investors worried about the uncertain outlook for America’s economy will be eager to hear Walmart’s guidance on growth for the year ahead.



PHOTO: REUTERS
Internet algorithms reach the Supreme Court
On Tuesday America’s Supreme Court considers a law governing internet communications that galls Republicans and Democrats alike. Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act gives web platforms largely free rein to host or remove users’ content without worrying about lawsuits brought in response to damaging words or images. Critics on the left say that the law allows platforms to spread hate speech; those on the right contend that it permits suppression of conservative voices. Despite many attempts, Congress hasn’t found a fix.

Now, the justices get a turn. Gonzalez v Google was brought by relatives of a woman killed by Islamic State in a terrorist attack in Paris in 2015. They say that YouTube, Google’s video platform, shares blame for her death as its algorithm fed radicalising clips to potential IS recruits. Google contends that without the protection of Section 230 sites will lose the capacity to help users find “needles in humanity’s largest haystack”. The outcome is hard to predict: only one justice has spoken about the issue, warning of the “enormous control” that digital platforms wield over speech.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Shakespeare’s “First Folio” at 400
This year marks the 400th anniversary of the first collected edition of William Shakespeare’s plays, known as the “First Folio”. Half of the works in it had never been published before. In London the Globe Theatre is celebrating by staging a season of plays that would have been lost without the First Folio, starting this week with “The Winter’s Tale”. But this Shakespearean staple will be performed with a twist. The Globe boasts not one but two theatres inspired by historical venues. “The Winter’s Tale” will play across both.

Shakespeare’s tale of two kingdoms switches back and forth between a domestic tragedy set in Sicilia and a pastoral comedy set in Bohemia. To reflect those changes in setting and mood, the Globe’s production traverses between the theatre’s small, candlelit indoor space (the show’s team features a ‘candle consultant’) and the lively expanse of its famous outdoor venue. The concept is clever—enhanced by an entertaining execution of perhaps the playwright’s most famous stage direction: Exit, pursued by a bear.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Tuesday: Which American crooner was known for songs such as “Magic Moments” and “It’s Impossible”?

Monday: What is the alternative name for an abbess (the head nun in a convent)?

The suppression of liberty is always likely to be irrational.

John Rawls
