The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 22, 2023

President Joe Biden gave a pugnacious (and relatively short) speech in Warsaw reaffirming America and NATO’s continued support for Ukraine after nearly a year of fighting against Russia’s invading forces. Mr Biden said that “Ukraine will never be a victory for Russia” as he promised more sanctions against Vladimir Putin’s regime. Earlier Mr Putin gave a long, rambling state-of-the-nation address to his country’s parliament. He announced that Russia would suspend its participation in New START, its last remaining nuclear-arms-reduction treaty with America.

The S&P 500 and the Dow Jones Industrial Average each suffered their worst day since mid-December, dropping by 2%. Home Depot’s share price shed 7% after the home-improvement retailer forecast flat sales this year, owing to a housing-market slowdown. Indeed, sales of existing homes in America fell by 0.7% in January from the previous month, and by 37% from a year ago.

Mexico’s former security minister was convicted in a New York court of accepting huge bribes from cartels to traffic drugs. Genaro García Luna, who denies the allegations, was a central player in President Felipe Calderón’s “war on drugs” and is the country’s most senior official to ever be tried in America. His sentencing, which could put him in jail for life, is set for June.

The Biden administration proposed making migrants ineligible for asylum if they cross the border illegally without having first sought protection in another country along the way. The rule could enter into force in May and last two years. President Joe Biden is keen to avoid a surge of asylum-seekers when Title 42, a different rule allowing for migrants’ rapid expulsion from America, expires in May.

The special grand jury investigating Donald Trump’s interference in the 2020 presidential election in Georgia recommended that multiple people be indicted, the jury forewoman told the New York Times. She declined to answer whether America’s former president was among them, but said, “You’re not going to be shocked.” The decision about whom to charge will be made by Fani Willis, the local district-attorney.

America’s Mormon church and its investment manager were fined $5m by financial regulators to settle allegations that they underreported finances. An official at the Securities and Exchange Commission said that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and Ensign Peak Advisers went to “great lengths” over two decades to avoid disclosing an equity investment portfolio worth at least $32bn.

Business activity in the euro zone grew unexpectedly quickly in February, according to estimates released on Tuesday, bolstering hopes that the bloc’s economy will avoid recession. S&P Global’s flash composite purchasing managers’ index rose to 52.3 this month, compared with January’s reading of 50.3; a score above 50 represents growth. Activity in the service sector increased at its fastest rate since June.

Fact of the day: 20,000, about the number of Russians arrested for protesting against the war in Ukraine. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
Hong Kong’s self-inflicted economic wounds
Hong Kong may have handled the post-vaccine covid world worse than anywhere on earth. The territory wasted the time it gained in 2021 from an effective zero-covid strategy by failing to jab enough elderly people or to improve medical facilities. After the virus spread through the population in early 2022, officials needlessly maintained harsh restrictions, even though most people had contracted the disease.

For an international business hub, that had inevitable economic consequences. GDP fell by 3.5% in 2022. Paul Chan, the financial secretary, who delivers his budget on Wednesday, has limited means to help: Hong Kong’s reserves have fallen from the equivalent of 20 months’ government expenditure to 12, about HI$800bn ($102bn). There is hope, though. The territory has now relaxed many covid restrictions and mainland China has reopened its border. The government says businesses, many of which have recently moved offices out of the territory, will return. But those self-inflicted wounds will not heal easily.



PHOTO: REUTERS
China’s growing role in Russia’s war
Wang Yi, China’s top diplomat, wraps up his eight-day tour of Europe on Wednesday. Much of his time has been spent talking about the war in Ukraine and efforts to stop the fighting. Mr Wang’s boss, Xi Jinping, is expected to give a “peace speech” on Friday, the one-year anniversary of Vladimir Putin’s invasion.

American and European officials are sceptical. China’s professed neutrality is in reality a pro-Russian pseudo-neutrality. On his trip Mr Wang visited Moscow, Russia’s capital. Meanwhile, Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, warned that China is considering sending weapons to Mr Putin’s regime.

As America and China drift towards a new cold war, the events in Ukraine have increasingly resembled a proxy conflict. China has sought to use the war to undermine Western unity. So far, it has not worked. The European Union’s foreign-policy chief, Josep Borrell, said it would be a “red line” if China were to send arms to Russia.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Can Nvidia ride the AI wave again?
Nvidia, an American chip designer, is the consummate seller of shovels in a gold rush. Its share price ran up in 2016 as interest in Bitcoin and artificial intelligence created new demand for its products: chips that were originally designed to draw graphics on video-gamers’ screens. But its shares are down 35% from the heady days of late 2021. Its latest earnings, released on Wednesday, are expected to be dire, with revenue and income hit by plummeting demand from cryptocurrency miners.

Still, analysts will be looking for hints that Nvidia can benefit from another AI boom brought about by the launch of tools like ChatGPT, an eerily perceptive chatbot. In truth, Nvidia has its work cut out. The boom is highly centralised around tech giants such as Google and Microsoft. Their focus on developing in-house technologies will curb demand for Nvidia’s products—and leave less room for the company to ride the wave again.


PHOTO: AFP
Lloyds Bank reports earnings
Britain’s biggest mortgage lender, Lloyds Bank, should have several reasons to be cheerful as it publishes its financial results for 2022 on Wednesday. Last year’s interest-rate rises widened the gap between what it must pay on deposits and what it can charge on loans, boosting profits. Meanwhile, Britain’s economic outlook has improved. A few months ago the country was widely believed to be in a recession. That now seems to have been (perhaps temporarily) staved off. This should limit the provisions the bank must set aside against bad loans.

Yet Barclays and NatWest, two of Lloyds’ competitors on the British high street, saw sharp falls in their share prices after they reported last week. Analysts were unimpressed by the profits they had made from rising rates. Politicians are chivvying banks to pay depositors more. And Britain’s economy is still set to shrink this year, says the IMF. The country’s bankers are not out of the woods yet.


PHOTO: PHOTO BY JUSTIN SUTCLIFFE
An immersive David Hockney experience
When art lovers see masterpieces they can look tiny and remote, especially if they’re in a large gallery. Not so at Lightroom, a new space for immersive exhibitions in London. The commercial venture opens on Wednesday with “Bigger & Closer (not smaller & further away)”, which celebrates the work of David Hockney. The show uses 27 multi-focus cameras to project images onto walls 11 metres high. Visitors see the world through the British artist’s eyes—and hear his drily humorous commentary.

The spectacle, with a score by Nico Muhly, an American composer, lasts around 50 minutes. At one moment the 85-year-old artist is capturing the arrival of spring with a few gestures on his iPad, at another he’s drawing inspiration from the grandeur of a drive through the San Gabriel mountains in California. The effect is both majestic and intimate. “Bigger & Closer” is an artistic experience tailor-made for the Instagram age.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Wednesday: Which ex-football star’s wife was once known as “Posh Spice”?

Tuesday: Which American crooner was known for songs such as “Magic Moments” and “It’s Impossible”?

It is only afterward that a new idea seems reasonable. To begin with, it usually seems unreasonable.

Isaac Asimov
