The world in brief
August 18, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A commissioner for the Economic Community of West African States, a regional bloc, told army chiefs it is prepared to use force to restore democracy in Niger “if everything else fails”. It had met in Ghana to discuss a standby force. Army officers in Niger overthrew President Mohamed Bazoum on July 26th and have so far ignored calls from ECOWAS, the United Nations and Western powers to reinstate him.

Walmart, the world’s largest retailer, reported revenue of $162bn in the three months to July, surpassing analysts’ expectations of $161bn and up 5.7% on the same period last year. The American retail giant revised its sales-growth forecast to 4-4.5% this year, up from 3.5%. The firm credited its strong numbers to easing inflation and high demand for low-priced groceries, but warned that rising fuel prices and high borrowing costs could still hurt consumer confidence.

Lenovo, the world’s biggest maker of personal computers, reported a 24% drop in revenue to $12.9bn in the April-June quarter, missing analysts’ estimates of $13.8bn. The Chinese giant had seen a 14% drop in annual profit for the year to March, its first annual decline since 2019. Lenovo is suffering from an industry-wide slump, as customers, hit by inflation, rein in spending.

Residents in parts of north-western Canada were ordered to evacuate, as a wildfire raged in the region. In Yellowknife, a city in the fire’s path, all 20,000 residents were leaving on Thursday. No deaths have been reported but several buildings have been destroyed. In Hawaii, meanwhile, officials defended their decision not to sound sirens during recent devastating wildfires, saying people associate the sirens with tsunamis.

Israel will go ahead with the sale of the Arrow-3, its most advanced long-range missile-defence system, to Germany for $3.5bn after America approved the deal. It is the largest military-export agreement in Israel’s history. The money will come from a €100bn ($109bn) fund Germany set up for military modernisation after Russia invaded Ukraine. Delivery is expected in late 2025.

The drinking water of up to 26m Americans is contaminated with toxic per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, according to new data from the Environment Protection Agency. PFAS, sometimes called “forever chemicals” because of their durability, are found in household items and have been linked to cancer and infertility. EPA said it will finalise new PFAS regulations by the end of this year.

Russia’s Luna 25 space probe entered the moon’s orbit, bringing the country significantly closer to becoming the first to land on the lunar south pole in search of frozen water. India also aims to land a spacecraft there this month. The presence of water could eventually enable longer stints on the moon and therefore the mining of its resources.

Figure of the day: 304, the number of Metro stations in Paris’s underground, 32 more than on London’s Tube. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America, Japan and South Korea go camping
Even uneasy bedfellows huddle together for warmth on a cold night. China’s assertiveness, North Korea’s belligerence and Russian aggression have pushed America, Japan and South Korea closer into each other’s arms. When their leaders meet at Camp David, the American president’s retreat, on Friday, countering these threats will be high on the agenda.

The two East Asian countries, both American treaty allies, have not always got on well. But an attempt at reconciliation, mostly driven by Yoon Suk-yeol, South Korea’s president, has created a rare possibility of greater co-operation, albeit one which could be undone by a change in administration in any of them. This is especially true of South Korea, where memories of Japan’s colonial misdeeds, and a feeling that it has not properly atoned for them, remain strong. If the amity is to last, the leaders need to create structures, such as regular trilateral meetings or a communication hotline, that will outlast their terms in office.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
How Estée Lauder lost its charm
Estée Lauder is not looking her best. In May the grande dame of the American cosmetics industry reported quarterly net sales of $3.75bn, a 12% drop from the same quarter last year. The conglomerate also lowered its sales forecast for 2023—from a year on year decrease of 5-7% to 10-12%—as sales at Asian airports and other travel-retail outlets, an important market, recovered more slowly than anticipated. Its latest quarterly earnings will be released on Friday.

It was not meant to be this way. High-end cosmetics brands thought that the easing of China’s covid restrictions would lead to a boom for the lucrative duty-free travel business. Long locked-down consumers, it was thought, would enjoy new-found freedoms. But China’s economic recovery has spluttered; now the world’s second-largest economy is flirting with deflation, which would hit revenues and profits. Time, perhaps, to work some of Estée Lauder’s revitalising magic on its own brand.


PHOTO: SPL
What is a human embryo?
Because human embryos—usually defined as cells in the first eight weeks of development—can develop into fetuses and ultimately people, research on them is in most countries restricted to the first 14 days. But scientists can now make embryo-like models, called “embryoids”, from human stem cells. The legal status of these remains unclear. This has prompted an international group of eminent biologists to suggest a new legal definition of embryos, to help clarify when society should limit research.

Writing in the journal Cell, they propose that an embryo be defined as a group of human cells that, combined with a womb-like environment, has the potential to form a fetus. That breaks with many countries’ current definitions, which state that embryos arise from fertilisation, and introduces the idea that an embryo is not just a clump of cells, but also must be in surroundings that allow it to develop. If adopted, the new definition would put embryoids outside current restrictions on research.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America’s flood-insurance mess
Although floods in America have caused at least $323bn of direct damage since 1960, private insurers generally do not offer residential coverage. That is sold by the federal government. But a history of underpricing risk and allowing development in floodplains has left its National Flood Insurance Programme more than $20bn in debt to the Treasury.

Congress has repeatedly failed to reform the programme. Legislation passed in 2012 that updated flood maps, for example, was reversed when voters realised that their premiums would shoot up. In 2021 the NFIP unilaterally changed how it determines premiums. Risk Rating 2.0 includes more sources of flooding, such as heavy rainfall.

Again, homeowners with higher premiums are unhappy. On Friday ten states, led by low-lying Louisiana, will ask a federal judge to make the NFIP ditch its new methodology. The Government Accountability Office, an auditor for Congress, has warned of a further budget crisis if the reform is rolled back. For Congress, simply treading water may soon become impossible.



PHOTO: SHUTTERSTOCK
Talking Heads, twice in a lifetime
In 1983 Talking Heads released their fifth album, “Speaking In Tongues”. It was a commercial and critical hit. With an expanded line-up of first-rate funk musicians, the influential New York art-pop quartet embarked on a tour, including three nights at the Pantages Theater in Hollywood, which were set up to be filmed by director Jonathan Demme. His film, “Stop Making Sense” would go on to be acclaimed as the greatest concert movie ever made.

A newly expanded soundtrack to the film is re-released on Friday. It underlines a belief by David Byrne, the lead singer, that many of the movie’s songs are now the definitive versions, surpassing their original studio counterparts. A remastered film will return to cinemas in the autumn. The irresistible joy in the performance, ingenious staging by Mr Byrne (inspired by traditional Japanese theatre) and the open artifice of arranging the shows for cinematic effect make it a peerless big-screen music experience.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Niamh Quinn, Dublin, Ireland
Jaime Jean, Mexico City, Mexico
Rob Blair, Harare, Zimbabwe

They all gave the correct answers of Oppenheimer, Office, Hobby and Rapper. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: What is the term for people who sell supplies and equipment for ships?

Thursday: What is the largest ice shelf in Antarctica, at almost 500,000 square kilometres?

With confidence, you have won before you have started.

Marcus Garvey
