The world in brief June 8, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 22:40 GMT+1 / 05:40 Hong Kong

Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky said that a “stalemate is not an option” in the war against Russia, and that Ukraine had to reclaim “full control” over its entire territory. He also said that NATO should invite Ukraine to join, despite having previously accepted that Ukraine could not be a member of the military alliance. Russia is strenuously opposed to Ukrainian membership of NATO.

The World Bank lowered its forecast for global growth for 2022 by 1.2 percentage points from 4.1% to 2.9%. The bank’s “Global Economic Prospects” report warns that the world is entering a “protracted period of feeble growth and elevated inflation” after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine “magnified” a slowdown in the global economy caused by the covid-19 pandemic.

Janet Yellen, America’s Treasury secretary, said America was facing “unacceptable” levels of inflation. Giving testimony to the Senate Finance Committee she said the pandemic’s effect on supply chains and high food and energy prices caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine had contributed to high inflation across rich countries. An “appropriate budgetary stance is needed to complement monetary policy actions by the Federal Reserve”, she said.

Boris Johnson, Britain’s prime minister, held his first cabinet meeting since surviving a vote of no-confidence among his fellow MPs. He said the result would “draw a line under issues our opponents want to talk about”. Other Tories were less sure; former party leader William Hague urged him to resign, as the level of opposition to him had been “devastating”. The final tally, 211 to 148, fell short of the simple majority needed to remove him as leader. But with 41% of his own MPs in rebellion, his government looks set for paralysis.

By 2024 all mobile phones, tablets, e-readers, cameras and other such devices sold in the EU must have a common charging point. Apple, which uses its own sort, has long resisted such a change. Currently three sorts of chargers are common; by 2024 the USB type-C design will dominate. Studies show that having a common charger will save consumers money.

Two of the Gupta brothers—a clan of businessmen accused of plundering state institutions in South Africa—were arrested in Dubai. South African officials said extradition talks with the United Arab Emirates were under way. They had fled after a judicial commission began an investigation in 2018. They are believed to have benefited hugely from their ties to Jacob Zuma, a disgraced former president.

Target, an American big-box retailer, lowered its profit forecast, saying it has too many unwanted goods. Three weeks after reporting a lower than expected profit in the first quarter it said inventory rose 43% last quarter compared with a year earlier as demand for outdoor furniture and appliances declined faster than expected. In recent weeks other retailers have reported they have too much inventory.

Fact of the Day: 685m, the number of gamers in China. Now they are battling 33m South Koreans for dominance of e-sports. 

Rebuilding Ukraine with Russian money?
If you add the Russian central bank’s currency reserves subject to Western sanctions to the value of other seized goodies, such as superyachts, nearly $400bn-worth of Russian assets have been frozen since the invasion of Ukraine began. And according to the Kyiv School of Economics, the economic damage to Ukraine is around $600bn. To many, therefore, the idea of using those Russian assets to compensate Ukraine for war damage seems irresistible.

Such a plan faces high practical and legal hurdles. For individuals to have their assets confiscated usually requires conviction for a specific crime and evidence that the assets were an instrument of it, or linked to the proceeds from it. Western leaders want to expand the list of crimes that warrant seizure, such as avoiding sanctions. But getting consensus will be tricky. And even the confiscation of state assets would require Western governments to designate Russia a hostile power, which they have shied away from doing.


The Gupta capture
From the Great Train Robbery to the looting of $1bn from Iraq’s central bank by Saddam Hussein’s family, the record books have no shortage of massive heists. But surely none would compare with the allegations of South Africa’s “state capture”—monumental graft involving at least 49bn rands ($3.2bn) worth of public contracts being routed through consulting films or shell companies linked to Ajay, Atul and Rajesh Gupta, mostly between 2009 and 2018.


The term was used in a 2016 report by the then public protector that laid out allegations of improper influence over South African politicians by the brothers. (They deny any wrongdoing, describing the allegations against them as politically motivated.) The Guptas’ flamboyant lifestyles in Dubai, where they fled in 2018, rubbed salt in the wound. South Africans now have some hope of justice: on Monday police in the United Arab Emirates arrested Atul and Rajesh in connection with “money laundering and criminal charges”. Yet due process will probably not be swift. Expect a lengthy fight over extradition and, if that succeeds, a drawn-out court case.

​​Resisting the invaders in occupied cities
As part of the Ukrainian government’s plans to launch a counter-attack to retake the south, the country’s underground army will be critical. Ukraine claims its partisans have killed more than 100 Russian soldiers in the occupied city of Melitopol, the unofficial capital of the resistance. And they are active elsewhere too. In Izyum, eight Russian soldiers purportedly died after eating pies spiked by a seemingly friendly old lady.

Ukrainian authorities had hurriedly laid down the basic structure for an insurgency in the months before the war. The underground resistance mixes professional soldiers and volunteers. There is now a national network of secret arms dumps, safe houses and potential sympathisers. A website published by the Special Operations Forces, which co-ordinates the fighters, offers advice about how to organise clandestine resistance (stick to a need-to-know basis), prepare an ambush (ensure clear escape routes) and cope with being arrested (keep calm and hope for the best).

Getting the grain out
A visit to Serbia on Monday by Russia’s foreign minister had to be abandoned after his plane was denied permission to travel through any of the air space en route. But Sergei Lavrov may have better luck getting to Ankara on Wednesday. The Turkish capital is just a short hop across the Black Sea—a body of water which is also the focus of his visit.

Mr Lavrov will meet his Turkish counterpart, Mevlut Cavusoglu, to discuss the creation of a safe corridor for ships carrying Ukrainian agricultural products. Pressure on Russia to end its blockade of Ukraine’s ports is mounting. On Monday Russia’s ambassador to the United Nations stormed out of a Security Council meeting after the EU accused his country of causing a global food crisis. Turkey has offered to help clear the mines floating near Ukrainian ports and to provide escorts to ships. Yet Turkey’s reputation as an honest broker has been dented by accusations that it has bought grain Russia had stolen from Ukraine.


America before and after Roe v Wade
“Pregnant? Need help?” a flyer reads: “Call Jane.” In the 1960s and early 1970s a group of women in Chicago helped other women to obtain abortions, which were then illegal. To evade the law, members used “Jane” as a group pseudonym. “The Janes”, a documentary chronicling their clandestine activities, is released on Wednesday on HBO.

The Janes’ efforts began with a helpline directing women to sympathetic doctors. But the organisation eventually performed abortions themselves​​—11,000 of them. The collective disbanded in 1973 after the Supreme Court’s ruling in Roe v Wade established a legal right to abortion.

After a draft of another Supreme Court opinion was leaked last month, suggesting that the justices will soon overturn Roe, the film is a timely reminder of what parts of America could look like again. At least 13 states have “trigger laws” that would automatically ban almost all abortions if Roe were reversed. More could follow. Perhaps the Janes will rise again.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Who was the first African-American woman to be elected to the United States Congress?

Tuesday: Which type of tea is named after a British prime minister?

Less is only more where more is no good.

Frank Lloyd Wright
