The world in brief
September 6, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Kim Jong Un, North Korea’s leader, “expects” to meet President Vladimir Putin in Russia, according to American officials. The reclusive Mr Kim will reportedly travel this month—probably by armoured train—to the far-eastern Russian city of Vladivostok. Last week the Biden administration expressed concern over a potential arms deal between the two, as Mr Putin seeks weapons for his war against Ukraine. The Kremlin declined to confirm the summit.

Oil prices surged above $90 a barrel for the first time this year after Saudi Arabia and Russia, the world’s second- and third-largest producers, said they would continue to limit output. Saudi Arabia is choking supply at around 9m barrels per day, 25% below its declared maximum output—a regime it will maintain until the end of 2023.

France is in talks with Niger’s junta to potentially withdraw some of its 1,500 troops from the country, French officials told local media. The soldiers were stationed in Niger to fight jihadists in the region. Relations between the two countries unravelled in July after a military coup toppled Mohamed Bazoum, Niger’s elected president; France, the former colonial power, has refused to recognise the junta.

Federal judges in Alabama ruled that the state’s proposed electoral map must be redrawn because it illegally diluted the power of black voters. The same court (and the Supreme Court) earlier struck down the original map. The revised version, like the first, had created just one majority-black voting district out of seven, rather than the two the court requested. A court-appointed “special master” will draw a new map.

Saudi Arabia and Iran exchanged ambassadors for the first time since 2016, the result of a deal brokered by China. The two originally severed ties after Iranian Shia protesters attacked Saudi diplomatic missions after the country executed Nimr al-Nimr, a dissident Shia cleric. Saudi Arabia also recently restored relations with Iran’s ally, Syria.

The City Council of Birmingham, in Britain, has declared itself in effect bankrupt. Europe’s largest local authority blocked all spending beyond core services after its budget was drained by an equal-pay settlement. It has so far paid £1.1bn ($1.4bn) to claimants but a further £760m remains. The Labour-run authority also blamed its £87m shortfall on lower tax incomes and central-government cuts.

Jorge Vilda, the coach who led Spain’s women’s football team to win this year’s World Cup, was dismissed amid the fallout from a row over an unwanted kiss. The manager had backed Luis Rubiales, the president of Spain’s football federation, who forced a kiss on a female player during the awards ceremony. Dozens of Spain’s top footballers refused to play under the current administration.

Figure of the day: 15, the number of premium games that feature combat in the top-selling 20. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
A Georgia arraignment, minus Donald Trump
Donald Trump’s private jet will not be landing in Georgia on Wednesday. After turning himself in to authorities at the Fulton County jail in August, he waived his right to appear at his arraignment. Last week he pleaded not guilty to racketeering and other charges stemming from his alleged effort to change the result of the 2020 presidential election.

Some of his 18 co-defendants, however, will be arraigned in person. Mark Meadows, Mr Trump’s former chief of staff, is trying to get his case moved from state to federal court (where he believes his prospects would be better). He argues that, by facilitating Mr Trump’s alleged conspiracy, he was merely doing his job. In court filings, three others—Republicans who submitted false paperwork to Congress alleging that Mr Trump had won Georgia—have pointed fingers at Mr Trump. All were charged under a law originally designed to bring down the mafia. Their strategy is fast becoming apparent: blame the kingpin.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Rishi Sunak’s rough question time
On Wednesday Rishi Sunak faces Sir Keir Starmer, the leader of the opposition, at the first Prime Minister’s Questions since Britain’s Parliament broke up on July 19th. It will be a rough ride.

In the summer recess before an election year, governing parties typically road-test their campaign lines. That went badly for Mr Sunak’s Conservatives. A week focused on irregular migrant boats ended with the evacuation, over a legionella scare, of a barge intended as new accommodation for asylum-seekers. In “health week” NHS waiting figures reached a new high. And as schools returned on Monday, ministers were scrambling to identify hundreds of buildings feared to be unsafe because of flaws in their concrete.

Grim polls for the Tories have barely shifted in recent months: a survey by Redfield and Wilton, a pollster, published on Monday, gave Labour a 16-point lead. Sir Keir had a 17-point advantage over his rival—his best result since Mr Sunak became prime minister last October.


PHOTO: AP
Mexico’s ruling party picks its presidential candidate
Morena, Mexico’s ruling party, will on Wednesday announce its candidate for the presidential election in June 2024. It will almost certainly be Claudia Sheinbaum, the former mayor of Mexico City. She was 17 percentage points ahead of her closest rival in the final public opinion poll in August, before Morena began its opaque process of surveying 12,500 people across Mexico to help make its pick. Ms Sheinbaum is a heavyweight politician, but has benefited from the implicit support of Andrés Manuel López Obrador, the president.

On September 3rd Xóchitl Gálvez, a senator, was anointed the candidate for an opposition coalition comprising the Institutional Revolutionary Party, the National Action Party and the Party of the Democratic Revolution. Mexico is therefore almost certain to get its first female president next year. Hugely charismatic, Ms Gálvez will put up a good fight. Morena is projected to win the presidency, but Ms Sheinbaum may rule over a divided congress.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Australia braces itself for economic slowdown
Interest rates may well have peaked down under. On Tuesday Australia’s Reserve Bank held them steady at 4.1% for the third consecutive month, after inflation dropped by more than expected. The annual rate eased to 4.9% in July, from 5.4% in June.

But it isn’t all good news. Australia’s economy is slowing, and data released on Wednesday will show by how much. The Reserve Bank expects it to eke out growth of just 1% in the year to December. That is slower than the population growth rate, meaning a fall in GDP per person.

One big concern is slowing growth in China, Australia’s biggest trading partner. Australia usually relies on China’s huge appetite for iron ore and coal. Even after it launched a campaign of economic coercion against Australia in 2020, China still accounts for almost a third of Australia's global trade in goods and services. If China’s demand for Australian resources crashes with its economy, the “lucky country” will feel it.



PHOTO: COURTESY OF SOTHEBY'S
The story of dress and power
“Optics governed more or less everything in the political world,” wrote Michelle Obama in “Becoming”, her memoir. “And I factored this into every outfit.” A 1950s dress by Norman Norell, an American designer, worn by Mrs Obama to a Christmas concert in 2010 was particularly resonant. The first vintage piece ever donned by a First Lady at a public event, it championed thrift-store shopping before it was fashionable. It eloquently suggested to a country reeling from recession that there was no shame in rewearing clothes time and time again.

That item, and nine others in Sotheby’s “Fashion Icons” collection, can already be bid for online and are open to viewing in New York from Thursday. From Princess Diana’s famous black-sheep jumper to a wedding veil worn by Madonna, each spotlights fashion’s symbolic power. But it is the dress worn by Mrs Obama—who on average generated $14m for the fashion industry during each public appearance as First Lady—that steals the show.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: What three-word phrase is often used by conservatives as an insult to President Joe Biden?

Tuesday: Which woman is the national personification of the French republic?

Human beings are unable to be honest with themselves about themselves.

Akira Kurosawa
