The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 11, 2023

The death toll from the earthquakes that hit Turkey and Syria on Monday passed 23,000, as bitterly cold weather stoked fears that few people will now emerge from the rubble alive. The World Bank pledged $1.78bn of aid for Turkey. The first aid convoy reached Syria on Thursday, where the rescue effort has been complicated by a decade of war and a regime that is suspicious of outsiders.

In a fresh missile attack, Russia hit power infrastructure in cities across Ukraine, including Kyiv, the capital. Ukrainian officials said that 17 rockets struck the south-eastern city of Zaporizhia in one hour. The head of Ukraine’s armed forces, General Valery Zaluzhny, claimed that two missiles crossed over Moldova and Romania, though the latter country denied its airspace was intruded.

The Pentagon shot down an object flying at high altitude (12,000 metres) over Alaska’s airspace, citing the threat of a potential collision with civilian aeroplanes. The downed object, “roughly the size of a small car”, was smaller than the Chinese balloon America shot down last week. No indication was given about the object’s owner or whether it was a balloon.

Japan’s prime minister, Kishida Fumio, is reportedly set to appoint Ueda Kazuo, an academic, to replace Kuroda Haruhiko as governor of Bank of Japan. The change comes as the central bank prepares to tighten monetary policy for the first time since 2007. The unexpected choice of Mr Ueda, an academic and doveish former member of the bank’s policy board, has increased uncertainty around the turn.

Russia’s deputy prime minister, Alexander Novak, said that the country would cut its oil output by around 500,000 barrels a day in response to Western sanctions. On Sunday the EU banned the seaborne import of Russian diesel, having already done so for crude oil. The G7 has also introduced a price cap. Oil prices rose on Mr Novak’s announcement.

The FBI found one classified document in a consensual search of the Indiana home of Mike Pence, America’s former vice-president. The search came several weeks after his aides found additional classified papers there. The FBI has also searched the private homes of President Joe Biden and—with a search warrant—his predecessor, Donald Trump, for classified documents.

Britain’s national statistics agency revealed that the country narrowly avoided a recession last year, as it released figures showing that GDP growth was unchanged in the fourth quarter. GDP dropped by 0.2% in the third quarter; two consecutive contractions mark a recession. Britain’s chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, called the economy “more resilient than many feared”—but analysts still expect a recession this year.

World this week: Read our brief round-ups of this week’s biggest stories in politics and business.

Word of the week: dekasegi ryugaku, a Japanese term that means “earning money while studying overseas”. Read the full story.

A tense anniversary for Iran’s Islamic Republic

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Saturday Iranians mark 44 years since the country overthrew its secular monarchy. It has been an unnerving few months for the theocratic regime that replaced it: protests over the death of Mahsa Amini, a young woman arrested for wearing her headscarf “improperly”, posed the biggest threat to its authority in years.

By locking up nearly 20,000 people and sentencing dozens to death the clerics have dampened dissent. University campuses, which were hubs of protest, became heavily policed. As part of an annual pardoning, the regime has reportedly offered amnesty or reduced prison sentences for “tens of thousands” (though the terms would seem to exclude most political prisoners).

Iran’s economy, however, is a mess. Inflation has soared. The government subsidises petrol, meaning a litre last month cost the equivalent of five American cents, but this is unsustainable. When prices inevitably go up Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader, may face renewed resistance.

Starlink’s indispensable role in Ukraine

PHOTO: REUTERS
Ukrainian troops have used the Starlink satellite-internet service for everything from artillery spotting and command-and-control to flying military drones. But earlier this week Gwynne Shotwell, the president of SpaceX, which provides the portable antennas, announced that the firm is restricting military uses of its technology. Ms Shotwell said that the technology “was never intended to be weaponised”, and that SpaceX had taken steps to prevent Ukraine from using it to control drones. Her comments puzzled critics: in December SpaceX revealed the existence of “Starshield”, a version of Starlink aimed squarely at governmental and military customers.

This development has worsened already strained relations between Ukraine and the tech firm. SpaceX has reportedly prevented its service from working in Crimea, where Ukraine has conducted numerous raids. Mykhailo Podolyak, a Ukrainian government adviser, said the company should choose which side it is on. But besides such displays of public displeasure, Ukraine has few other options. For now, no other satellite-internet firm can match Starlink’s scale.

Donatello, a father of the Renaissance

PHOTO: BRIDGEMAN
Michelangelo’s chiselled, five-metre-high David, carved in the early 1500s, may be the world’s most recognisable sculpture. Yet that work owes a debt to another Italian master, Donato di Niccolo di Betto Bardi, better known as Donatello. His bronze David—lithe, enigmatic and less than two metres tall—was the first free-standing nude statue since antiquity, predating Michelangelo’s by about 60 years.

On Saturday a breathtaking exhibition of Donatello’s statues, busts and carvings opens at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. Among its delights are his shallow bas-reliefs, noteworthy for their one-point perspective and illusions of depth. His figures, meanwhile, are delicately rendered and anatomically precise. Little wonder he is called a father of the Renaissance, cited as an influence on Michelangelo, Raphael and other successors. Few museums outside Italy own Donatello’s work, making the show a rare treat.

Male stripping and entrepreneurship

PHOTO: CAPITAL PICTURES
Early in many films, in what is known as the “inciting incident”, a character must make a momentous choice. Their decision puts the plot in motion. In “Magic Mike’s Last Dance”, released in America and Britain on Friday, the protagonist’s dilemma is simple: do I gyrate for this rich woman in my underwear or not?

Mike (Channing Tatum) obliges, and is whisked off to London by his client to set up an all-male strip show. The characters insist that it is a noble and ancient art form—although all that thrusting and grinding will make one’s testicles “chafed as shit”, Mike warns his new recruits.

The film is a meta-commentary on itself. The first two “Magic Mike” films so titillated viewers—the first one made $167m from a $7m budget—that Mr Tatum decided to turn the premise into a live show. Launched in 2017, it is still being performed in Las Vegas and London. Sex, it seems, still sells.

Weekend profile: Gustavo Dudamel, star maestro

PHOTO: EYEVINE
Gustavo Dudamel is easily excited—unusually so in the serious world of classical music. “Everything was too loud and everything was too fast, and I loved it,” remembered Sir Simon Rattle, an illustrious conductor, of his introduction to Mr Dudamel, then a young prodigy. Now aged 42, Mr Dudamel has mastered the tempo without sacrificing the passion. On Tuesday it was announced that he will jump from the Los Angeles Philharmonic, which he has led since 2009, to the New York Philharmonic in 2026.

Born in Venezuela, Mr Dudamel got his start in the country’s famous free music education programme, El Sistema, playing the violin. When his own conductor was late to rehearsal one day, he picked up the baton and gave it a whirl. His conductor invited him to be his assistant; Mr Dudamel was about 12. He soon began directing a Venezuelan orchestra and won an international conducting competition in Germany at the age of 23.

Today the curly-haired Mr Dudamel is one of the world’s most recognisable maestros. He has brought verve to the Los Angeles Philharmonic; the Paris Opera, where he is music director; and the animated film “Trolls 2: World Tour” (for which he voiced the character of a conductor). He has led Venezuela’s Simón Bolívar Youth Orchestra in a rousing version of “Mambo”, from Leonard Bernstein’s “West Side Story”, a number of times. One performance has 1.7m views on YouTube.

Mr Dudamel’s appointment in New York should restore some cachet to the ensemble, which, in its glory days in the mid-20th century, was led by Bernstein. Today it faces a challenging financial future: elderly concertgoers have been reluctant to return even as the pandemic subsides. Mr Dudamel’s spirited conducting and renown promise to attract crowds and wealthy donors.

In Los Angeles, he always made a point of bowing to the cheap seats behind the orchestra. He encourages clapping between sets and rejects stilted dress codes. It is the music, not its trappings, that so excites him.

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. There are two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Leopard or seal skins ultimately suggests corrupt, crude source of wealth (12)

1 across Reward for cutting service charge back (6)

2 across City where fortunes are told, though not quietly (5)

3 across Fake a terminal affliction to see medicine man (6)

Factual clues

1 down Something governments in the Gulf can’t rely on forever (12)

1 across Oil companies are enjoying more of this than ever (6)

2 across The birthplace of Pervez Musharraf (5)

3 across A member of Britain’s fastest growing religion (6)


The winners of last week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Christine M. Steckel, Ardmore, United States

Luis Arcentales, Shanghai, China

Christian Weber, Hamburg, Germany

They all gave the correct answers of Level 42, High Noon, Ada Lovelace, Call Me Madam and radar. The theme is that they all contain palindromes: level, noon, ada, madam and radar.

The worst enemy to creativity is self-doubt.

Sylvia Plath
