The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (23:00 GMT / 07:00 Hong Kong)

America said it was likely that Russians “all the way up the chain of command” were responsible for war crimes in Ukraine. Beth Van Schaack, the state department’s war-crimes monitor, called the situation a “new Nuremberg moment” and said Russian troops had probably committed war crimes in “every region” where they have been deployed. Reports of Ukrainian soldiers summarily executing Russians were also being investigated, she said.

Saudi Arabia’s energy minister denied rumours that OPEC+ is considering raising output at its meeting early next month. After the Wall Street Journal reported that the cartel and its allies might increase production by 500,000 barrels a day, oil prices shed 6%, before rebounding. Last month OPEC+ agreed to cut output by 2m bpd.

Ukraine came close to nuclear disaster as shells hit near reactors and radioactive waste storage facilities at the Zaporizhia power plant on the weekend, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency. Russia and Ukraine blamed each other for the attack on the facility, which is in Russian-controlled territory. Volodymyr Zelensky said that Russian forces launched almost 400 strikes on eastern Ukraine on Sunday.

Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, said that “ground forces” could be used in an incursion into Kurdish-controlled Syria in retaliation for a deadly attack in Gaziantep, a Turkish province. Mortar shells fired from northern Syria on Monday killed two people. Cross-border tensions escalated after Turkish air raids on Kurdish militants in Syria on Sunday in response to a bomb attack in Istanbul last week.

A shallow 5.6-magnitude earthquake hit Java, Indonesia’s most-populated island, on Monday killing at least 162 people and injuring hundreds more. Dozens of buildings were reduced to rubble in the densely-populated Cianjur region, which is 75km southeast of Jakarta, the capital. People were evacuated amid a risk of landslides.

Two Estonian men were arrested and indicted by American prosecutors for allegedly defrauding investors of $575m in a crypto Ponzi scheme. According to the indictment, the men charged customers for a share of profits from a nonexistent crypto-mining operation. The defendants “capitalised on both the allure of cryptocurrency, and the mystery surrounding cryptocurrency mining”, said prosecutors.

The football associations of seven European countries told their captains not to wear “OneLove” armbands, promoting sexual equality, at the World Cup in Qatar. Players had been prepared to pay fines for doing so but FIFA, football’s governing body, threatened yellow cards. Gay sex is illegal in Qatar. The tournament opened on Sunday with a 2-0 drubbing of the host country by Ecuador.

Fact of the day: 37%, the share of international sporting events hosted by autocracies since 2012. Read the full story.

Kamala Harris showboats in the Philippines

PHOTO: AP
America’s vice-president is in the Philippines. After meeting on Monday with the country’s president, Ferdinand Marcos junior, on Tuesday Kamala Harris will visit Palawan, an island on the front line of a struggle for maritime dominance. It is to the west and north of Palawan that America’s navy conducts “freedom of navigation” missions around the disputed South China Sea, most of which China claims as its own. China and the Philippines also squabble over fishing and oil-and-gas rights within the 200-nautical-mile Philippine “exclusive economic zone”.

To manage the Chinese navy, coastguard and fishing fleet without overly riling it, the Philippines deploys its civilian coastguard rather than its (rather feeble) navy. Ms Harris’s visit will include a spell aboard such a Philippine boat, albeit safely outside waters claimed by China. That is intended to communicate America’s readiness to help the Philippines defend itself from armed attack. China, irked by such commitments, may find a way to signal its disapproval for Ms Harris’s showboating.

Europe’s economies brace for a fall

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
There is a bout of optimism around the EU economies these days. Quarterly GDP figures released last week were not as bad as expected, employment continued to grow and, crucially, energy prices on wholesale markets have come down from their summer highs. On Tuesday the OECD, an intergovernmental research body, will add its assessment of Europe’s economic outlook.

The elation may be premature. Energy prices have fallen but remain high, straining businesses that have ticked along thanks to a post-pandemic economic rebound. Long-term contracts with gas and electricity suppliers have cushioned the blow this year—but in 2023 the full effect of energy price rises will be felt.

A second worry is the hit to the incomes of European households. A post-pandemic cushion of savings buoyed consumption, and the risk of unemployment remains low. But that may not last either. The billions of euros Europe’s governments have dispensed to firms and households may not prevent Europe from tumbling into recession.


Iranians continue their lethal protest

PHOTO: PA
Death has galvanised protest for more than two months in Iran. Unrest began in mid-September when Mahsa Amini, a young woman detained by the morality police, died in custody. Whenever protests seemed to ebb, more killings sent people back to the streets. So it was in recent days, after Kian Pirfalak, a nine-year-old boy, was shot by security forces. His funeral drew large crowds.

The regime has arrested thousands and issued a handful of death sentences. In the past week it detained two actresses who removed their headscarves in public. But it has not been able to stop the scattered, leaderless unrest. There have been periodic strikes across the country, including in Tehran’s famed bazaar. Before their opening World Cup match against England on Monday Iran’s team refused to sing the national anthem. Ehsan Hajsafi, the captain, has already said he “sympathises” with the protesters—an act of defiance on the world’s biggest stage.

Cyril Ramaphosa visits Britain

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
King Charles III will host his first state visit as Britain’s monarch on Tuesday. It will offer his guest, Cyril Ramaphosa, South Africa’s president, welcome respite from politics at home.

For on Tuesday Mr Ramaphosa will also learn how many nominations he has received to continue leading South Africa’s ruling African National Congress, ahead of a vote at the party’s national conference next month. Although he is expected to have a solid lead over his rivals, the ANC has acquired a habit of defenestrating sitting presidents.

Mr Ramaphosa may enjoy discussing with the King shared interests such as wildlife and the environment. His conversations with Rishi Sunak, Britain’s prime minister, on Wednesday will be less convivial. Britain is unhappy with South Africa’s refusal to condemn Russia for its invasion of Ukraine. Mr Ramaphosa, in turn, is expected to press for Britain and its allies to lift sanctions on Zimbabwe and to offer Africa more aid and investment to deal with climate change.

The history of an American siege

PHOTO: AP
In “American Caliph”, a book published on Tuesday, Shahan Mufti, an American journalist, tells the extraordinary, and largely forgotten, story of what is still the largest-ever hostage-taking in America.

In 1977 the Hanafis, a black Muslim group based in Washington, DC, took nearly 150 people hostage in three buildings near the White House. The siege, masterminded by Hamaas Abdul Khaalis—who styled himself as an American Caliph or leader of America’s Muslims—was intended to stop the release of a film Hanafis considered blasphemous, and as revenge for the murder of several members of Khaalis’s family by the Nation of Islam, a rival group. Two hostages died.

Mr Mufti weaves wider historical events into his story, such as Malcolm X’s assassination and new laws that facilitated Muslim immigration to America. These elements supply the rich context of a saga that builds in tension until the last gripping moments. The reader is left wondering how this extraordinary tale could have been neglected for so long.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: The French novel “Les Liaisons Dangereuses” was remade as a teenage movie drama in 1999 with which title?

Monday: Blood-, grey- and fox- are all followed by which suffix?

We must believe in free will—we have no choice.

Isaac Singer
