The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 20, 2023

Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, said his country was “very concerned” about China potentially supplying Russia with weapons in Ukraine. Mr Blinken said he had warned Wang Yi, his Chinese counterpart, that any such support would have “serious consequences”. The pair met at the Munich Security Conference, an annual diplomatic event. It was the first in-person meeting between senior officials from both countries since America shot down a suspected Chinese spy balloon earlier this month. Earlier Mr Wang had described America’s response to the ballon as “hysterical and absurd”.

Turkey will wind down its rescue operations on Sunday, nearly a fortnight after a devastating earthquake struck the country’s south-eastern provinces and neighbouring Syria. The death toll has passed 46,000, though many people are still missing. Some 26m people need aid according to the World Health Organisation. Around 345,000 apartments have been destroyed in Turkey.

America held joint air drills with South Korea and Japan after North Korea unexpectedly fired a ballistic missile into the Sea of Japan. North Korea billed the “surprise drill” as proof of the country’s “nuclear deterrent”. Its officials accused America and South Korea of “destroying the stability of the region”. South Korea said its exercises involving strategic bombers demonstrated America’s “ironclad commitment” to defend the Korean peninsula.

Ramzan Kadyrov, the Kremlin’s puppet leader of the Chechen Republic, said he planned to set up his own private army. Mercenaries of the Wagner Group have boosted Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, but have riled officials in Moscow with open criticism of their leaders. Mr Kadyrov praised Wagner’s “impressive results” on the battlefield and said he hoped to one day “seriously” compete with its leader, Yevgeny Prigozhin.

At least five people were killed by Israeli rockets in central Damascus, Syria’s capital, according to the country’s officials. The strike is the first since a deadly earthquake in Syria’s north-west two weeks ago. It is common for Israel to fire missiles at targets linked to militants loyal to Iran and Hizbullah (an Iranian-backed political party and militia), but less so in residential areas. Israel did not comment.

Andrés Manuel López Obrador, Mexico’s president, signed a decree to begin nationalising the country’s lithium reserves. Mr Obrador believes nationalisation will prevent exploitation by foreigners. Mexico has about 1.7m tonnes of the increasingly sought-after mineral that is used to make electric-vehicle batteries. About a dozen foreign companies have concessions to develop lithium deposits, but all such contracts will now be reviewed.

Yet another balloon was destroyed in America. A visitor at an art fair in Miami knocked a sculpture by Jeff Koons off a plinth, shattering it. The 16-inch-high porcelain balloon dog was worth around $42,000. Thankfully for admirers of Mr Koons, America’s most famous living artist has produced thousands of similar sculptures. One balloon fewer is unlikely to inflate prices.

Fact of the day: $48bn. The value of the weapons and aid that America has sent to Ukraine under President Joe Biden. Read the full story.

Biden surveys NATO’s eastern flank

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As the one-year anniversary of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine approaches, on Monday Joe Biden sets out to Poland. From the capital, Warsaw, a safe distance from Ukraine’s border, he will pledge continued support to the war-torn country. It is unclear if he will venture any closer—unlike many Western leaders (and his wife) he has not visited Ukraine. Neither is it known whether Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, will meet him in Poland.

As is, his two-day visit will be packed, meeting his Polish counterpart, Andrzej Duda, as well as the leaders of eight other eastern members of NATO. While fending off calls to release American-made jets, Mr Biden will encourage them to keep shuttling weapons to Ukraine. In turn, they will push for an increased American presence in the region. Last year America established its first army base on NATO’s eastern flank in Poland. But as the war enters its second year and the threat of Russia looms, NATO’s frontline states will seek more assurances.

Russia’s resilient economy

PHOTO: ALAMY
When Russia invaded Ukraine a year ago, many predicted disaster for its economy. The West introduced sanctions, and the rouble collapsed. But Russia’s economy has proved surprisingly resilient. GDP only fell 2.2% in 2022, compared with early predictions of a 10% contraction. The IMF now forecasts growth of 0.3% for 2023.

Russia’s central bank, which releases its latest monetary-policy report on Monday, continues to exude calm. Soon after the outbreak of the war it increased interest rates from 9.5% to 20%, signalling that it was serious about tackling inflation and stemming a bank run. It gradually brought down the rate and has kept it at 7.5% since September, saying inflation is elevated, but manageable.

Recent Western sanctions on Russian oil have proved underwhelming, though this month’s extension of the measures to include refined products like diesel will be harder to dodge. Still, the damage will not persuade Russia to halt the war.


Can Air India fly high again?

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Air India began this year in inglorious fashion. Many Indians were outraged when it emerged that a drunk man allegedly urinated on a fellow business-class passenger. To some, the episode summed up the decline of the flag carrier, once a source of national pride. Tata, the conglomerate which retook the airline from the government last year, is now hoping to return the company to its former glory. It is betting on expansion. Last week it placed a record order: 470 aircraft from Boeing and Airbus, two planemakers, for $70-80bn.

There is plenty of scope for growth. India’s aviation market is close to fully recovering from the pandemic and is expected to be the third-biggest in the world within a decade, after America and China. But competition will also be tough. Air India is India’s third-biggest airline with a market share of less than 10% in 2022 and is generating losses. So too is SpiceJet, another big airline, which reports results this week. Meanwhile IndiGo, an industry behemoth with more than half the domestic market, is profitable and awaiting the delivery of 500 more aircraft.

European consumers look confident

PHOTO: AFP
On Monday fresh consumer-confidence figures will probably confirm the optimism that has gripped the euro area since January. Energy prices have tumbled thanks to a warm winter and plentiful gas storage, and stimulus from the European Union’s pandemic recovery fund has propped up member states’ economies.

There is hope that the euro zone will avoid a recession this year. Last year’s GDP growth is expected to have reached 3.5%, rather than the 3.2% estimated a few months ago. The European Commission has also raised its outlook for economic growth in 2023 to 0.9% from 0.3% in its November forecast. All EU countries except Sweden are expected to grow.

Yet there are still headwinds. Inflation is easing but remains high. The war in Ukraine is showing no sign of ending soon. And next winter energy prices could shoot up again as China rapidly recovers from its zero-covid regime, increasing the demand for gas.

Bernie Sanders warns of the ills of capitalism, again

PHOTO: PICTURE ALLIANCE
The left-wing senator from Vermont is the longest-serving independent in US congressional history. But Bernie Sanders’s dedication to his usual cause is undimmed in his fourth book. “It’s OK to Be Angry About Capitalism”, released this week, takes aim at the concentration of riches in the hands of a few. Mr Sanders offers his ideas to cure America’s economic and political systems of their ills. Chief among them are increasing tax on corporations and reforming campaign-finance rules to free political parties from big donors.

Mr Sanders’s message may not be new, but by unpacking problems from wealth inequality to health-care access he taps into some of the frustrations felt by working Americans who struggle to make ends meet. An “uber-capitalist” system, he argues, is what drove disaffected, working-class Democrat voters to support Donald Trump and the Republicans. Mr Sanders is often teased for his grouchy demeanour. His book shows why he sees few reasons to be cheery.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Monday: What is the alternative name for an abbess (the head nun in a convent)?

The older we get the less afraid we are.

Sidney Poitier
