The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 20, 2023
Following a weekend of fraught negotiations UBS, a bank, bought Credit Suisse, its troubled rival, in a SFr3bn ($3.25bn) deal brokered by the Swiss government. The president of the Swiss Federal Council, Alain Berset, said the agreement—the biggest banking merger in years—was vital to maintain “the stability of international finance”. The Swiss National Bank will offer a liquidity line of $100bn to UBS. Swiss regulators believe the acquisition is the only way to restore confidence in Credit Suisse, a victim of the fallout from the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank.

Hours after UBS acquired Credit Suisse, America’s Federal Reserve and the central banks of Britain, Canada, Japan, Switzerland and the EU announced co-ordinated measures to boost liquidity and “ease strains in global funding markets”. In a joint announcement, the central banks said they would switch from weekly to daily dollar auctions. The policy, which was last implemented at the beginning of the covid-19 pandemic, will help lenders around the world access dollars, the banks said.

Ma Ying-jeou, a former president of Taiwan, will visit China later this month, his office said. It will be the first such visit by a current or former Taiwanese president since the government of the Republic of China fled to the island in 1949 after losing a civil war to Mao Zedong’s communists. Mr Ma’s journey comes at a time of escalating tension between Taiwan and China, which claims the territory as its own.

Montenegrins went to the polls to elect a new president. The incumbent in the small Balkan country, a NATO member that also wants to join the EU, is the pro-Western Milo Djukanovic, who is running for another five-year term. His opponents include Andrija Mandic, who favours closer ties with Russia and Serbia. A second round is scheduled for April 2nd if no candidate wins over 50% of the vote.

The Taliban government ordered Afghan officials to sack any relatives that they had appointed, and to stop doing so in the future. Many posts had to be filled after the Taliban sacked a lot of senior staff after seizing power in 2021. Since then Afghanistan has been beset by economic and humanitarian crises. Foreign aid has been largely cut off.

Egypt hosted talks between Palestinian and Israeli officials, in a bid to reduce violence in the West Bank before the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, which begins on Wednesday. A previous such meeting hosted by Jordan on February 26th failed to halt the fighting, which has escalated since the beginning of the year.

Kosovo and Serbia agreed to implement an EU-backed deal that would begin normalising ties between the two sides. Serbia has never recognised the independence of its former province, declared in 2008. Recent flare-ups over the treatment of Serbs in Kosovo have threatened to spill into open conflict. The agreement provides for some level of “self-management for the Serbian communities” in Kosovo, said Josep Borrell, the EU's foreign-policy chief.

Fact of the day: 68%, the percentage of offers for a place at Oxford University in 2022 that were made to state-school students. Read the full story.




PHOTO: REUTERS
Xi and Putin huddle in Moscow
China’s president, Xi Jinping, arrives in Moscow on Monday for his first visit to Russia since it invaded Ukraine last year. Chinese officials portray the three-day trip as a peacemaking venture, highlighting a “political settlement” plan that China proposed last month. Mr Xi will no doubt repeat his calls for respecting sovereignty and avoiding any use—or threats to use—nuclear weapons. To counter Western critics, he is expected to hold virtual talks soon after with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky.

Nonetheless, the visit is still an emphatic display of Chinese solidarity with Mr Putin, shortly after the International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant for him. Mr Xi is not expected to condemn Russia’s invasion, or its atrocities, and will probably join Mr Putin in blaming the war on NATO expansion. He will almost certainly offer Russia more non-military support. And American officials fear he is also considering a Russian request to supply it with lethal weapons—although China denies any such plans.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Macron’s government on the line
On Monday France’s National Assembly will vote on two motions of no-confidence, after Emmanuel Macron’s decision on Thursday to force through a raise of the minimum pension age from 62 to 64 without a parliamentary vote. To pass, each motion needs to secure the backing of a majority of deputies in the 577-member assembly. If that happens Elisabeth Borne, the prime minister, and her government will be toppled, less than a year after taking office.

The opposition has the numbers, as Mr Macron does not command a parliamentary majority. But opposition parties are split, and some deputies from the centre-right Republicans are hesitating. Most of the French dislike the reform, and many call Mr Macron’s actions anti-democratic. Unions have called for another national strike on March 23rd. In some cities, protests against the president’s controversial use of a constitutional provision to bypass the parliamentary vote have turned nasty. The survival of Mr Macron’s government hangs in the balance.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Video-gamers talk big business
The first Game Developers Conference, in 1988, attracted 25 participants and took place in a programmer’s sitting room in California. This year’s summit, which begins on Monday in a giant exhibition centre in San Francisco, demonstrates how the industry has grown. Some 3.2bn people now play, thanks largely to the spread of the smartphone. Women are now almost as likely as men to call themselves gamers. Gaming is catching on among all age groups. In Britain, for instance, half of those aged 55-64 play video games, though for less time than the young. Worldwide there are now more console owners aged 35-44 than 16-24.

A bigger audience means a bigger market. Consumers will spend $185bn on games this year, more than half on mobile games. That is about five times the value of the cinema box office, and two-thirds more than the video-streaming business. As gaming continues to grow, it is beginning to rival television as the world’s favourite entertainment medium.



PHOTO: REUTERS
How to replenish Ukraine’s artillery shells
Ukraine is firing fewer artillery shells than the invading Russian forces it faces, but the country is still burning through rounds faster than its Western allies can manufacture them. A meeting of EU foreign ministers on Monday is thus likely to approve a landmark scheme to jointly procure 155mm shells. The initiative, proposed by Estonia, would allow the EU to place a massive order, encouraging Europe’s ammunition-makers to invest in additional manufacturing capacity.

But ammo production will not be boosted immediately. The bloc’s foreign-policy chief, Josep Borrell, therefore wants to earmark €1bn ($1.1bn) for the European Peace Facility, a special fund, to help reimburse governments that send Ukraine ammunition from their stockpiles more quickly. According to an EU draft document countries could be reimbursed for up to 90% of the cost of their munitions. Those that do more to help Ukraine will receive more money.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Cracking down on organic-food fraud
Organic food in America is a $63bn market. But it is still too easy for companies to issue fake “credence products”, in the jargon; especially tempting when organic crops can be sold at one-and-a-half times the price of their conventional rivals. On Monday new guidelines for organic food from the Department of Agriculture take effect. The department says they are the biggest overhaul since such standards were introduced in 1990.

America has cracked down on fake organic produce from abroad. But the largest organic fraud case in the country’s history—in which a supplier sold more than $120m of conventional grain as organic—unfolded across several states in the country’s Midwestern heartland. Another $46m fraud case against two farmers is under way in Minnesota.

Yet the new guidelines, which insist on better certification in the supply chain, might not be strong enough to stop such cheating. Certifiers are still not required to test for pesticide residues at annual visits, and a troubling incentive structure—in which the farmer pays the certifier—remains intact.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Monday: Which site in St Petersburg was the official residence of the Tsar and was stormed by revolutionaries in 1917?

An author’s first duty is to let down his country.

Brendan Behan
