The world in brief
July 26, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

China will replace Qin Gang, the foreign minister who suddenly disappeared from public view in June, with Wang Yi, a senior diplomat who previously held the role. Officials have given little explanation for his absence, citing “health reasons”. Separately Pan Gongsheng was named the new governor of the country’s central bank. He will aim to reduce high levels of local government debt while reviving the property sector.

A federal judge struck down one of President Joe Biden’s asylum policies, which requires most asylum-seekers to enter America with an appointment or first apply in countries that they had travelled through. The effect has been to vastly reduce unauthorised crossings at the southern border. The ruling takes effect in two weeks to leave time for an appeal.

Tech firms’ quarterly earnings revealed divergent fortunes in the digital-advertising market. Alphabet’s revenues grew by 7% year on year, to $74.6bn, beating expectations. But those at Snap, a comparative minnow, fell by 4%, to $1.1bn. It shed nearly a fifth in market value in post-session trading. Separately, Microsoft reported year-on-year revenue growth of 8%, to $56.2bn, aided by demand for its AI offerings.

Russia’s lower house of parliament voted to raise the maximum age of conscription from 27 to 30. The legislation, which would also ban men leaving Russia after being summoned to a conscription office, still needs to be approved by the upper house and Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. Last year Russia announced plans to increase its armed forces by around a third, to 1.5m.

America’s education department opened an investigation into whether Harvard’s preference for the children of alumni is racially discriminatory, since it disproportionately favours white students. “Legacy” admissions have come under greater scrutiny since the Supreme Court abolished “affirmative action”, or policies that give advantage to some minority students. The probe was instigated amid complaints by organisations representing minorities.

United Parcel Service, a delivery giant, and a union representing more than 340,000 of its American workers reached a tentative agreement, averting a strike that was due to begin next week. The new five-year contract, which union members must approve, includes raises and a commitment to install air conditioning in vans. UPS handles around a quarter of the packages shipped daily in America.

Banc of California agreed to buy PacWest Bancorp, a regional lender, creating a bank with $36bn in assets and more than 70 branches in California. Deposits at PacWest dropped during America’s banking crisis in March. Two private-equity firms, Centerbridge Partners and Warburg Pincus, enabled the deal with an equity investment of $400m.

Figure of the day: 30,000, the number of visas Britain issued to harvest-pickers in 2021. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Fed catches its breath
Having taken a breather last month, the Federal Reserve is likely to resume raising interest rates on Wednesday. At the end of a regular policy meeting it is almost certain to raise short-term rates to a floor of 5.25%, up from 5%. Fed officials have repeatedly signalled that a robust labour market and persistently high inflation are forcing their hands, and that they may follow up with another rate increase before the year is done.

Nevertheless, many economists believe that a hike today will mark the final step in the Fed’s tightening cycle. Starting from a floor of 0% in March of 2022, it has been the sharpest series of rate increases in America in four decades. There is mounting evidence that, though still hot, both inflation and the jobs market cooling. And if the Fed goes too far, it risks doing more harm than good.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Is Ukraine’s offensive stalling?
Ukraine’s counter-offensive will soon enter its eighth week. It has already liberated more territory than Russia captured during a months-long winter offensive, which took the eastern town of Bakhmut and little else. But progress has been slower than hoped. Ukraine’s initial assaults were costly and could not smash through Russian lines. Russia has mounted a stronger defence than expected, conducting mobile and rapid counter-attacks.

However, optimists point to several factors in Ukraine’s favour. Russia has few reserves in the rear. In recent days Ukraine has used British-supplied Storm Shadow missiles to strike Russian air bases and ammunition depots. One such strike is thought to have destroyed 2,500 tonnes of ammunition.

Ukraine’s best bet is probably to continue to wear down Russia’s army using its advantages in long-range precision weapons, guided to their targets by Western intelligence. The outcome of the counter-offensive is finely balanced.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Meta shows a thumbs-up
Expect news from techland on Wednesday. After a strong start to the year Meta, the parent company of Facebook and Instagram, reports its quarterly results. Its share price has more than doubled since January.

One reason for the surge is a recovery in its advertising business, which provides almost all of its revenue. Shrinking marketing budgets, along with privacy settings brought in by Apple, which stopped advertisers from tracking people on their phones, squeezed revenues in the last three quarters of 2022. But in the first quarter of 2023 revenue from advertising rebounded, by around 4%.

Investors were also pleased by the company’s cost savings: since last year it has fired a quarter of its workers. They will be watching to see whether both these trends continue. Mark Zuckerberg, Meta’s boss, will also probably want to boast about the early success of Threads—an app that mimics Twitter. It drew 100m users within the first week of its launch on July 6th.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A House hearing on UFOs
For ufologists, long outside the mainstream, everything changed in 2017. That year the New York Times, considered one of America’s newspapers of record, exposed that the Department of Defence had from 2007 to 2012 funded a small programme to investigate UFO reports. Successor programmes took its place. In 2020 Marco Rubio, a prominent Republican senator, requested that the Pentagon produce a public report on its findings.

Many conspiracists who believe that Earth has been visited by aliens think that the government harbours—and covers up—such evidence. On Wednesday a former intelligence officer will testify to that effect before a subcommittee of the House of Representatives.

The whistleblower says he turned over to Congress classified information about Pentagon programmes that had recovered “craft of non-human origin” (a favourite conspiracy theory is that the government hoards such debris). The defence department has denied this, but in April conceded it was tracking some 650 unexplained incidents. It must now answer to many curious lawmakers.


PHOTO: JOHAN PERSSON / ROH
A ballet star shimmers again in London
Carlos Acosta, a world-famous Cuban ballet dancer and choreographer, “got used to living on very little” as a youngster. The 11th child of a lorry driver, he grew up in one of Havana’s poorest districts. Cuba’s communist government allocated three toys to each household, and rationed food so strictly that Mr Acosta’s mother once fed the family their pet rabbits. He was a rebellious teen who loved breakdancing. To keep him out of trouble his father sent him to ballet school.

It was smart parenting: for more than a decade, Mr Acosta was the principal guest artist of the Royal Ballet in Covent Garden in London. In 2016, after nearly 30 years of dancing, he retired. From Wednesday to Sunday this week Mr Acosta returns to the stage at the Royal Opera House to celebrate his 50th birthday. Audiences will again witness a dancer whose style is so “clear and sharp”, wrote one critic, that he seems to “throw off sparks”.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which French novelist had an affair with Frederic Chopin and was the subject of two poems by Elizabeth Barrett Browning?

Tuesday: Which 1979 Pink Floyd album is about a rock star suffering from alienation?

All great truths begin as blasphemies.

George Bernard Shaw
