The world in brief
May 27, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Ukraine said it shot down ten missiles and more than 20 drones which Russia launched at its capital, Kyiv, and eastern cities overnight. At least two people were killed and 30 more were injured in Dnipro after a missile hit a hospital there. In Kharkiv, a north-eastern city, a fire reportedly broke out in an oil depot after it was struck twice.

Janet Yellen gave June 5th as the updated “X-date”, when America’s government will default on its debts unless the borrowing limit is raised. That is several days later than the treasury secretary’s previous forecast, of June 1st. President Joe Biden and Kevin McCarthy, the Republican speaker of the House, are reportedly close to reaching a deal to raise the debt ceiling.

A Singaporean judge ordered Credit Suisse, a collapsed Swiss bank, to pay $926mn to Bidzina Ivanishvili, Georgia’s former prime minister. The blow comes ahead of the finalisation of its takeover by UBS, a rival bank, next week. Mr Ivanishvili, also Georgia’s richest man, first sued the bank for the alleged fraudulent mismanagement of his money. Credit Suisse said it would appeal against the ruling and described the judgment as “wrong”.

American consumer spending jumped by 0.8% month-on-month in April, exceeding expectations. After-tax income rose by 0.4%, as America’s job market shows little sign of cooling. The Federal Reserve’s preferred measure of inflation also ticked up to 4.4% in the year to April, up from 4.2% in March. This may force the Fed to consider raising interest rates again.

Aleksandar Vucic, Serbia’s president, ordered army units towards the border of Kosovo. Earlier a group of ethnic Serbs clashed with police in northern Kosovo while trying to block newly-elected officials from entering municipal buildings. Police fired tear gas; a police car was set on fire. Serbia’s defence minister, Milos Vucevic, said that it was clear that “terror against the Serb community in Kosovo is happening”.

The Turkish lira dropped to a record low ahead of the presidential run-off on Sunday, falling to 20 to the dollar. Since the election on May 14th, in which President Recep Tayyip Erdogan gained a narrow lead, the Turkish lira has fallen by 2.1%. Foreign investors in the country are deeply sceptical of Mr Erdogan’s flawed economic policies.

Belgium and Iran conducted a prisoner swap in Oman, which brokered the deal. Iran freed Olivier Vandecasteele, a Belgian aid worker, in exchange for Assadollah Assadi, a diplomat. Mr Vandecasteele had been sentenced to 40 years in prison and 74 lashes for alleged espionage, which he denies; Mr Assadi had been sentenced to 20 years in connection to a bomb plot in France.

Word of the week: Shukatsu, or “death planning” in Japanese, a term that combines the words “end” and “activity” and is often used in relation to funeral planning. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Russia’s Bakhmut “victory” overshadowed
On Thursday Yevgeny Prigozhin—whose Wagner Group recently claimed a Pyrrhic victory in Bakhmut—said his forces had begun withdrawing from the Ukrainian city, soon to be replaced by official Russian soldiers. Wagner’s “win” came at an immense cost: at least 10,000 of the 50,000 men whom it recruited from Russian prisons and a similar number of regular fighters died there, according to Mr Prigozhin.

Outside Bakhmut, the attention of Russian military bloggers has focused on the cross-border raid by pro-Ukrainian militias in Russia’s Belgorod region. Russia says it expelled the groups responsible. Whether or not Kyiv was behind the raid, the humiliation has worsened Russian morale. Now the battlefield has the feel of the lull before a storm—in this case, Ukraine’s much-anticipated counter-offensive.


PHOTO: THE ECONOMIST/VINCENT TULLO
The Kissinger century
On Saturday Henry Kissinger turns 100. As national security adviser and then secretary of state, Mr Kissinger orchestrated America’s rapprochement with China in 1972 and arms-control treaties with the Soviet Union. But he is also a deeply polarising figure, accused of enabling human-rights abuses in Bangladesh, Cambodia, Chile and elsewhere. In 1973 he controversially won a Nobel peace prize for negotiating a ceasefire in the Vietnam war.

Although he has not held public office for 46 years, China’s rise makes Mr Kissinger’s analysis of great powers increasingly relevant. Ahead of his centenary he spent more than eight hours in conversation with The Economist. He outlined his deep concerns about the state of relations between America and China. “We are on the path to… confrontation”, he warned, because “both sides have convinced themselves that the other represents a strategic danger”. But Mr Kissinger also laid out his strategy for avoiding world war three—through realism, dialogue and leadership.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Winners anointed at Cannes
On Saturday the main prizes will be handed out at the 76th annual Cannes Film Festival, including the coveted best-in-show award, the Palme d’Or.

One hotly tipped contender is “The Zone of Interest”, which dramatises the daily lives of Rudolf Höss (Christian Friedel), the commandant of the Auschwitz concentration camp, and his wife Hedwig (Sandra Hüller, a favourite in the Best Actress category). Directed by Jonathan Glazer, it was adapted from the novel by Martin Amis, who died on the day of its premiere, May 19th.

Several of the festival’s highest-profile films were shown “out of competition”, so are not eligible for awards. They include “Killers Of The Flower Moon”, a true-crime saga directed by Martin Scorsese, and “Jeanne du Barry”, a French costume drama starring Johnny Depp, who has had two recent court battles relating to domestic-abuse allegations. Protesters were unhappy that Cannes gave him the red-carpet treatment, even if it can’t give him a prize.


PHOTO: ALAMY
A French Open without its king
Few athletes have dominated an event like Rafael Nadal at the French Open. Mr Nadal has won the grand-slam title, one of tennis’s four most prestigious prizes, 14 times. But for the first time since 2004 the Spaniard, who is injured, will not feature in this year’s tournament, which starts on Sunday. His absence opens the door for his great nemesis, Novak Djokovic. Should the Serb win, he would overtake Mr Nadal as the man with the most grand-slam titles (23) and cement his claim as the greatest male tennis player ever.

But Mr Djokovic is himself battling injuries. He will also have to overcome a new generation of young prodigies, led by Carlos Alcaraz, a 20-year-old who is the world’s top-ranked player and the bookies’ favourite. Many consider the Spaniard the heir to Mr Nadal. The crown could soon be passed.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Bola Tinubu, Nigeria’s incoming president
When Bola Tinubu is inaugurated as Nigeria’s president on Monday, he will move into the official residence. Among his baggage will be plenty of the political and legal sort. The wealthy 71-year-old styles himself as the “Godfather of Lagos”, Nigeria’s sprawling commercial capital, where he was governor for eight years until 2007. His backers say that he cleaned up the city, increased the tax take nearly six-fold and built infrastructure.

Yet his record invites questions. His rivals are still disputing his election win in court and claim it was rigged. Some Nigerians suspect that he pulled strings in dubious ways in the past to help his predecessor as president, Muhammadu Buhari, get elected. Back in 2019, when Mr Buhari was running for a second term, onlookers spotted two armoured vehicles, similar to those used by banks to transport cash, driving into Mr Tinubu’s compound in Lagos. He dismissed any suggestion that he had bought votes. “If I have money…I give it to the people free of charge, as long as [it’s] not to buy votes,” Mr Tinubu explained, less than reassuringly.

Some wonder where his money comes from. His explanations have varied from inheritance and real estate to a large bonus earned while working as an auditor at Deloitte, an accounting firm. In the 1990s the American government froze his assets over his alleged links to the heroin trade. Mr Tinubu denied wrongdoing and reached a settlement with the Americans whereby he forfeited $460,000.

Others question how he so impressively increased Lagos’s tax take. Last year he settled a lawsuit accusing him of secretly owning most of a firm that had won a contract to collect taxes on behalf of Lagos state during his governorship. Court papers alleged that it earned a commission of 10% on all revenues collected there. Mr Tinubu again denied wrongdoing.

Mr Tinubu now faces one of the world’s toughest in-trays. Many Nigerians also question whether he has the energy—and health—to tackle it. He is often abroad for medical trips, including a recent stay in Paris. As the presidential race last year heated up Mr Tinubu had been absent from the public eye for so long that he released a video on Twitter of himself pedalling an exercise bike. “Many have said I have died”, he posted. “Well…Nope”.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues
1 down Adventurous archaeologist in a state with just one nearly extinct species, at first (7,5)
1 across Put money into heart of ruined favela system (6)
2 across Run-down dwelling gets new start in storybook (5)
3 across A tense doctors’ assembly (6)

Factual clues
1 down Someone whose latest cinematic adventure was shot just off the M25 motorway, near Slough (7,5)
1 across How activists increasingly try to influence companies’ behaviour (6)
2 across What Martin Amis published 14 times (5)
3 across One place almost all Donald Trump’s detractors have left (6)



This week’s quiz winners
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Mary Hoffee, Brookline, Massachusetts, America
Ivo Spigel, Zagreb, Croatia
Steve Corfield, South Croydon, Britain

They gave the correct answers: Renault, Sam Mendes, Sarah Lund, Ferrari and Rick Astley. The theme is characters in “Casablanca”: Captain Renault, Sam, Ilsa Lund, Signor Ferrai and Rick Blaine.


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Dana H. Shultz, Piedmont, California, America

Alice Li Hagan, Honolulu, Hawaii, America

Grant Mackay, Auckland, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of Group of Seven, global, orbit and Norway. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

The proper, wise balancing of one’s whole life may depend upon the feasibility of a cup of tea at an unusual hour.

Arnold Bennett
