The world in brief
July 27, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The Federal Reserve raised interest rates by a quarter-point, taking its benchmark rate to a range between 5.25% and 5.5%. Jerome Powell, chair of America’s central bank, declined to predict the pace of future rate increases and said that would depend on forthcoming data. To policymakers’ relief, America’s inflation rate appears to be easing—it was 3% in June, down by six percentage points from a year ago.

A federal judge refused to approve Hunter Biden’s plea deal with prosecutors over unpaid taxes. When the judge questioned whether the son of America’s president would have immunity from other potential charges, prosecutors said no, surprising his lawyers. Instead Mr Biden pleaded not guilty for now. The judge said that she would reevaluate the deal after the two sides had clarified its details.

There were conflicting accounts of a possible coup in Niger. Soldiers reportedly blockaded President Mohamed Bazoum’s residence and ministries in Niamey, the capital, on Wednesday. The president’s office said that the National Guard would “attack” rebels if they did not “return to better feelings”. A coup would further complicate Western efforts to help Niger stem campaigns by the insurgent groups that have been causing havoc in the country.

Israel’s Supreme Court said that it will hear appeals against new legislation designed to drastically limit its powers in September. The law—which all but eliminates the court’s ability to overturn government decisions on the grounds of “reasonableness”—was passed by the leading far-right coalition on Monday, prompting widespread protests. If the court rules that it is unconstitutional, it will be on a collision course with the government.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change elected Jim Skea of Imperial College London as its new chair. He will head the panel for the next five to seven years. Dr Skea co-chaired the IPCC’s latest assessment report, published in April, which argued that the window to prevent global temperatures from rising by more than 1.5°C above pre-industrial averages is rapidly closing.

Hun Sen, Cambodia’s prime minister for 38 years, announced that he will resign and hand power to his eldest son, Hun Manet, in the coming weeks. Mr Hun Sen’s Cambodian People’s Party won most of the seats in a rigged general election on Sunday, paving the way for the succession. The 70-year-old dictator had banned the Candlelight Party, the country’s main opposition, from registering.

Sinead O’Connor, the Irish singer-songwriter, died aged 56. She was known for the chart-topping single from 1990, “Nothing Compares 2 U”, her rebellious stances and her shaved head. In 1992, during a live televised performance, she ripped up a photo of Pope John Paul II, saying “fight the real enemy”—a criticism of sexual abuse in the Catholic Church.

Figure of the day: 220,000, the number of jobs cut by nearly 900 technology companies around the world in 2023. Read the full story.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
The ECB’s out-of-office meeting
The governing council of the European Central Bank (ECB) must be itching to go on holiday after months of difficult interest-rate decisions. But before they set their email auto-replies, the ECB faces a final call on Thursday. Rates might go up by another quarter of a percentage point. But the council’s more doveish members may prefer to hold off until they regroup in a few weeks.

Price rises in the euro zone have slowed: both headline and core inflation (which strips out energy and food prices) stood at 5.5% in June. But the private-sector economy is weakening and business sentiment is sagging, especially in Germany. If monetary policy is indeed working to cool both inflation and growth, the ECB could be close to pausing rate hikes, as other central banks have done. But the available data may not yet support a change of direction. Do not email in the meantime: the central bankers are out of the office, but will be back with a re-assessment in September.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
African leaders go to Russia with less love
The Russia-Africa Summit which starts on Thursday in St Petersburg was meant to be a diplomatic victory for Vladimir Putin. Since Russia’s president began his full-scale invasion of Ukraine the Kremlin has redoubled its efforts to woo African states, not least for their political influence: the continent’s 54 countries hold more than a quarter of votes at the UN General Assembly.

But the reported turnout—17 leaders versus 43 at the previous meeting in 2019—shows the limits of Russia’s appeal. A few attendees are customers of the Wagner Group of mercenaries; others want Russian arms. Some see Mr Putin as an ally in promoting a more multilateral world. But African countries are generally pragmatic. Russia has less economic clout than America, China or the EU. And its recent withdrawal from a deal to release Ukrainian grain exports will have harmed African interests. As a result many of the continent’s leaders may have decided that attending would have offered Russia a public-relations win too cheaply.


PHOTO: AP
Party in the DPRK
North Korea’s dictator, Kim Jong Un, is having a party—and, for the first time in years, he has invited guests. On Thursday Chinese and Russian delegations will watch a military parade that celebrates “Victory Day”—the 70th anniversary of the day North Korea claims, controversially, to have won the Korean war. No one else is known to have entered the country since it closed its borders at the start of the covid-19 pandemic, apart from a new Chinese ambassador who arrived with his staff in March and an American soldier who dashed across the border last week.

Don’t expect a grand reopening soon. The pandemic allowed Mr Kim to exert even tighter control over his heavily policed fief, and to continue developing nuclear weapons. As he has China’s and Russia’s support, chidings from America or South Korea have little sting. Mr Kim is having far too good a time to let his revelries end.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
Meloni cosies up in Washington
Italy’s prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, meets President Joe Biden in Washington on Thursday amid signs she is ready to pull her country out of China’s Belt and Road Initiative. In 2019 Giuseppe Conte’s populist coalition signed up to the programme of infrastructure projects that spans Eurasia, the Middle East and Africa. The pact has been one of the few bones of contention between America and its ally. It is due for renewal by the end of this year.

Ms Meloni has won friends in America by supporting Ukraine both diplomatically and militarily, despite being yoked in government to two parties, the Northern League and Forza Italia, once closely linked to Russia. Since becoming prime minister, she has also dropped her fiery Eurosceptic rhetoric. That too is appreciated in Washington. But Mr Biden is politically distant from the hard-right Ms Meloni and has been reluctant to invite her to the table with other European allies. Ditching the BRI could bring her closer to the in-crowd.


PHOTO: SKODONNELL / KEENAN
And now for something completely different…
In “Different Times: a History of British Comedy”, David Stubbs, a culture writer, charts the country’s changing sense of humour. Post-war comedy, he argues, was disinterested in altering the status quo—although that is news to anyone who has watched Monty Python. But he observes that from the late 1970s comedy merged with activism: stand-ups such as Alexei Sayle and Ben Elton fought Margaret Thatcher’s Conservative governments armed with gags. A decade of foul-mouthed shows followed, which were filled with righteous anger. Then comedy entered a new phase: political correctness.

Mr Stubbs sees this not as a straitjacket for comedians but as a liberation. He says that scrapping offensive tropes such as “dolly birds, amiable sex pests, comical Asians [and] nancy boys” enabled comedians to explore a broader sweep of British life. It is indeed good that comedians are no longer “punching down”—but comedy thrives on transgression. If comedians become too nice they might stop punching at all.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which Vincent Price horror movie was remade in 1986 by David Cronenberg with Jeff Goldblum in the lead?

Wednesday: Which French novelist had an affair with Frederic Chopin and was the subject of two poems by Elizabeth Barrett Browning?

Silent gratitude isn’t much use to anyone.

Gertrude Stein
