The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 17, 2023
A coalition of big American banks said they will deposit $30bn into First Republic Bank, a mid-sized lender, to shore it up. Regulators called the support “most welcome”; the S&P 500 rose by 1.8%. The Federal Reserve announced that banks had borrowed $11.9bn through its new lending facility, which offers strikingly generous terms, as of Wednesday.

France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, will force through his unpopular pension reforms—which would raise the retirement age from 62 to 64—by invoking an article of the constitution that allows the government to pass legislation without a parliamentary vote. That is a risk for Mr Macron, since Article 49.3 also allows MPs to submit motions of no-confidence in the government.

Poland will send four Soviet-era MiG-29 fighter jets to Ukraine “in the coming days”, with more on the way later, according to Andrzej Duda, the Polish president. Poland, which delivered the first Leopard tanks to Ukraine in February, will be the first country to satisfy Ukraine’s pleas for warplanes. America and Britain—both in NATO with Poland—have currently ruled out sending their own, more modern, jets.

Israel’s army killed four Palestinians in Jenin, a city in the West Bank where Israeli forces conduct frequent raids targeting Palestinian militants. A teenage boy was among the dead; at least 23 others were injured. The year has been a lethal one in the conflict: by most counts the Palestinian death toll is in the 80s, and Palestinian violence has also been growing, both in the West Bank and on the streets of Jerusalem and Tel Aviv.

Britain’s government offered most staff in the National Health Service a “substantial” bonus for this financial year and an increase in pay of around 5% in the coming one, according to the workers’ unions. Medical staff have participated in repeated industrial action in recent months. But the government’s offer does not include junior doctors—who just concluded a three-day strike in England—or their senior counterparts.

A political party of farmers ploughed to victory in provincial elections in the Netherlands, surprising everyone. The Farmer-Citizen Movement was established in 2019 after protests by Dutch farmers over government regulations to cut nitrogen emissions from fertiliser. But its bumper harvest of votes—nearly 20%—mean it is now set to become the biggest party in the country’s Senate, with 15 seats.

Heavy rain and flooding killed at least 15 people in the south-east of Turkey, according to state-run media. The two cities worst affected—Sanliurfa and Adiyaman—were both hit by the catastrophic earthquakes on February 6th, which killed more than 50,000 people in Turkey and neighbouring Syria. With elections in May, the Turkish government’s disaster response is under intense scrutiny.

Fact of the day: $229bn or 17%, the amount that has been wiped off the market value of America’s banks so far this month. Read the full story.


PHOTO: EPA
Which bank will be next?
It is a week since Silicon Valley Bank collapsed, sending shockwaves through financial markets. A solvency problem at a mid-sized American lender has morphed into a global reassessment of banks’ balance sheets. Alarmed investors are hunting for other institutions that might, like SVB, be vulnerable to runs.

In Europe, scrutiny is focused firmly on Credit Suisse. Ill-judged bets have led to recent multibillion-dollar losses at the Swiss investment bank. On Wednesday its share price cratered after its biggest investor ruled out buying any more stock. An emergency loan from the Swiss central bank of up to SFr 50bn ($54bn) reassured investors.

As in all banking crises, the biggest question now is “who next”? Opaque balance sheets, and the unpredictable tugs of investor confidence, make that impossible to answer. To prop up First Republic, a mid-sized American lender whose share price has also convulsed, a coalition of big American banks said they will deposit $30bn into it. With fear gripping markets, the spotlight may soon move to others.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A green light for Finland in NATO
Finland’s president, Sauli Niinisto, may return from his trip to Ankara on Friday with no small prize: an end to Turkey’s veto of his country’s bid to join NATO. Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, has held up the NATO applications of Finland and Sweden over the past year, accusing both countries—but primarily Sweden—of harbouring Kurdish militants it considers terrorists.

In January diplomatic tensions flared when a protester burned a Koran near the Turkish embassy in Stockholm, prompting Turkey to cancel a visit by Sweden’s defence minister to Ankara. But while Turkey continues to block Sweden’s membership bid, it appears to have dropped its objections to Finland’s. “We will meet with the president,” Mr Erdogan said on Wednesday, “and keep the promise we made.” Turkey’s parliament has until April 7th, when it goes into recess ahead of a general election in May, to ratify Finland’s accession protocol. Sweden will have a longer wait.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ireland’s past and present patrons
It has become a fixture for Ireland’s prime minister, or taoiseach, to mark the country’s national holiday, St Patrick’s Day, in Washington. On Friday Leo Varadkar will present President Joe Biden with a leafy green bowl of shamrock. The annual ceremony underlines the close historical and cultural links between Ireland and America—not to mention the political heft of its Irish diaspora.

Ties between the two governments have grown particularly close in recent years. Mr Biden, a proud Irish-American, has often supported the old country, and its EU backers, in their Brexit tussles with Britain. His administration has repeatedly threatened to freeze trade talks with the British government if it reneged on promises and reintroduced a hard border for goods between Ireland and Northern Ireland. If his support for the Irish position was not clear enough, he is expected to announce his first presidential trip to both Ireland and Northern Ireland next month—to mark the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday peace agreement.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The UN in Afghanistan
The UN’s political mission to Afghanistan, UNAMA, should be extended on Friday for another 12 months. But deciding how to engage with the Taliban, which seized power in August 2021, creates a dilemma.

The past year has dashed hopes that the Taliban may have mellowed from its 1990s incarnation. Afghanistan’s supreme leader, Haibatullah Akhunzada, is bolstered by his circle of religious hardliners. The UN says Afghanistan is the most repressive country in the world for women, who are excluded from work and public life. Girls are not allowed in secondary school. The country remains in a humanitarian crisis and appears to have again become a haven for al-Qaeda, a jihadist group.

Condemnations and entreaties from the UN fall on deaf ears. It must now decide whether to redouble efforts to try to influence the Taliban and uphold human rights or just focus on providing aid to the country’s hungry millions. Expectations of what UNAMA can achieve are low.


PHOTO: QUANTRELL D. COLBERT/PRIME VIDEO
Fandom in the digital age
Thanks to social media, it is easy for fans to form communities around musicians they love. But those echo chambers can push adoration to extremes. Superfans of the singer Beyoncé, who call themselves “the BeyHive”, have been known to send death threats to “haters” who cross their idol. “Swarm”, a seven-part comedy-horror series released on Amazon’s streaming service, Prime Video, on Friday, takes on such rabid fandom.

The show follows Dre (Dominique Fishback), an awkward young woman who goes to absurdly violent lengths to satisfy her obsession with Ni’Jah, a pop idol who bears a striking resemblance to Beyoncé. (The “swarm” of the title refers to Ni’Jah’s fearsome fanbase; Dre is a “killer bee”.) Donald Glover, one of the creators, is well placed to reflect on fandom; he is also a singer under the name Childish Gambino. The show, which is packed with celebrity cameos, is current, gory and funny—and reveals the menace behind the seemingly innocent question, “who is your favourite artist?”


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Friday: Which flower is on the flag of the state of Mississippi?

Thursday: What type of weather comes in three types: relief, convectional and frontal?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Vahul Sundar, Singapore

Rasmus Jonlund, Stockholm, Sweden

Corien Kershey, Ottawa, Canada

They all gave the correct answers of Taiwan Strait, TikTok, naval and tedium. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Reign, and keep life in this our deep desire—Our only greatness is that we aspire.

Jean Ingelow
