The world in brief
May 16, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the authoritarian incumbent president, is ahead of his rival Kemal Kilicdaroglu after the first round of voting in Turkey’s presidential election. Neither candidate reached the 50% threshold required to avoid a second round, but Mr Erdogan secured 49.5% of votes while Mr Kilicdaroglu, who represents an alliance of opposition parties, received 44.9%. The election will now go to an unprecedented run-off on May 28th. Mr Erdogan outperformed opinion polls, which had given Mr Kilicdaroglu a significant lead in the final days of the hard-fought campaign.

The European Commission cleared Microsoft’s $69bn merger with Activision Blizzard—in contrast to competition watchdogs in America and Britain, which have tried to block the deal. The EU’s competition chief approved the deal subject to Microsoft making Activision games available on other platforms. Microsoft’s American case will be heard in court in August and the firm has said it plans to challenge Britain’s judgment.

The head of the South African army met with officials in Moscow and visited Russian military academies, just as his country’s president denied favouring Russia over Ukraine. Last week America alleged that South Africa—which professes to be neutral—had shipped weapons to Russia late last year. South Africa denied the accusation.

China sentenced a 78-year-old American citizen to life in prison on spying charges in a closed-door trial. The specific allegations against John Shing-Wan Leung, a permanent resident of Hong Kong, are unclear. Meanwhile America charged Litang Liang, of Massachusetts, with allegedly informing Chinese authorities about Boston-area Chinese dissidents and others with “pro-Taiwan leanings”. He pled not guilty.

The UN’s International Organisation for Migration elected Amy Pope, an American, as its new director-general. Ms Pope left her role as one of the IOM’s deputy directors to run against the Portuguese incumbent, António Vitorino, who had the EU’s support. Ms Pope will be the first woman to lead the organisation, which seeks to help the more than 100m people forcibly displaced around the world.

The European Commission raised its forecasts for economic growth in the bloc—as well as for inflation. It reckons that the EU’s economy will expand by 1% in 2023, up from 0.8%, as recession fears ease. But it also said inflation would hit 6.7% in 2023 and 3.1% in 2024 (up from 6.4% and 2.8% respectively).

Vice, a media company once worth nearly $6bn, filed for bankruptcy protection ahead of a proposed deal to sell the business to some of its lenders, including Fortress Investment Group and Soros Fund Management. The youth-focused publisher sacked over 100 staff and ended its flagship TV news show in April. It says it will continue to operate throughout the period.

Fact of the day: 99.6%, the amount of DNA two people picked at random will share. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China’s economic revival
The only good thing about China’s disastrous economic performance in April last year—with Shanghai stuck in a draconian lockdown—is that this year’s economic figures will look sparkling by comparison. The numbers, released on Tuesday, could show that industrial production was 10% higher than in 2022 and retail sales were 20% higher, before adjusting for inflation. (Car sales increased by 83%, according to data already published by the China Association of Automobile Manufacturers.)

China’s economic resurgence is based on the retail, transportation and hospitality industries. All have been boosted as people return to shopping, travelling and dining out without fear of the indignities and inconveniences associated with China’s zero-covid policy. But because the recovery is narrow and confined to a handful of sectors it may not be durable, according to Capital Economics, a research firm. It expects growth to comfortably beat the government’s target of 5% for this year but “fizzle out” to a less sparkling, sub-5% pace thereafter.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Trump looms in Kentucky’s primary
In mid-term elections last November the Republican contenders backed by Donald Trump underperformed, causing speculation that the GOP would drift away from the former president. But Mr Trump, who is running to be elected president in 2024, now leads the Republican field. Polls suggest he has at least a 25-point lead over his closest rivals. And the frontrunners vying to win Kentucky’s Republican gubernatorial primary—which is being held on Tuesday—are both proudly touting their Trumpian credentials.

Daniel Cameron, the state’s top prosecutor, was endorsed by Mr Trump before any other Republicans entered the race. His main opponent, Kelly Craft, is playing up her experience as Mr Trump’s ambassador to Canada and to the UN.

That said, being seen as close to Mr Trump probably will prove less helpful when Kentuckians as a whole vote in November. The incumbent, Andy Beshear, is the most popular Democratic governor in the country—and happens to lead a heavily Republican state.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Tesla’s yearly shindig
The audience for Tesla’s annual shareholder meeting on Tuesday will be full of small investors who won a lottery to attend. Such adoring fans should help liven up the event, at the electric car company’s “gigafactory” in Texas. Elon Musk, Tesla’s boss, will no doubt extol the firm’s accomplishments over the past year, and may even hint at what it plans for the future (about which almost nothing is known).

Meanwhile, there will be votes on several proposals. J.B. Straubel, a former long-serving executive, will probably be elected to the board. And a plea for succession planning will probably be rejected, despite worries that Tesla relies too heavily on Mr Musk, who also runs SpaceX, a rocket company, and Twitter. Concerns that he is spreading himself too thin should be somewhat allayed by the recent news that Linda Yaccarino, the former head of advertising at NBCUniversal, will replace him as the social network’s chief executive.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Counting state killings
Capital punishment, once common, is now relatively rare. Four out of five countries have either abolished the practice or no longer apply it, according to the UN. But last year Amnesty International, a human-rights group, found a marked uptick in the use of the death penalty. In 2021 there were around 600 known executions worldwide, a 20% increase from 2020. Death sentences, meanwhile, jumped by 40%. The rise was mostly attributed to a few Middle Eastern countries, including Iran, which imposed the death penalty for drug crimes. (Both figures exclude China, which Amnesty reckons executes thousands of people each year, as well as North Korea and Vietnam.)

Activists will closely watch Amnesty’s latest review, published on Tuesday. But the long-term trend seems to be going in only one direction. In December the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution to suspend capital punishment, with 125 votes in favour (out of 184 present). Countries that kill criminals are increasingly pariahs.


PHOTO: SIMON SIMARD/PENGUIN RANDOM HOUS
A book on Russia’s road to war
When “The Russo-Ukrainian War” is published on Tuesday, the conflict will hang in the balance. Ukraine is expected soon to launch a long-prepared counter-offensive; Russians may break and flee, or dig in. The ink will hardly be dry on the first edition before a second is needed.

Still, the new book by Serhii Plokhy, a Ukrainian historian at Harvard, surveys the unresolved territorial tensions—from the late ninth century onwards—which have culminated in the current war. These issues, and President Vladimir Putin’s inability to deal with them peacefully, drove the seizure of Crimea and the eastern Donbas in 2014. The question of where Russia begins and ends also inspired his invasion of Ukraine on February 24th 2022.

Mr Plokhy outlines visions of the restoration of the Russian empire that may have tempted Russia’s president. He also makes clear that, by uniting Ukraine in loathing for him and Russia itself, Mr Putin’s legacy will be as the destroyer of those revanchist dreams.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: What is the real name of the superhero Captain America?

Monday: Which stretch of water between the Malay peninsula and Sumatra is the main shipping lane between the Indian and Pacific oceans?

Hate, emotionalism and frustration are not policies.

Madeleine Albright
