The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (00:16 GMT+1 / 07:16 Hong Kong)

The government of Mario Draghi, Italy’s prime minister, unravelled on Wednesday as the leaders of two right-wing parties in his coalition sat out a confidence vote in his government. Mr Draghi won the vote 95-38, but it was a hollow victory given the boycotts. Silvio Berlusconi, of Forza Italia, and Matteo Salvini, of the Northern League, had demanded the exclusion of the populist Five Star Movement from the governing coalition—a condition Mr Draghi refused to accept. He is expected to submit his resignation on Thursday, a move likely to precipitate early elections.

Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said that its objectives in Ukraine now go beyond the eastern Donbas region, a sign that Russia is expanding its war goals. Mr Lavrov told RIA Novosti, a state broadcaster, that Russia’s targets now include not only the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, in the east, but also Kherson and Zaporizhzhia in the south. On Tuesday American officials warned that Russia was adopting an “annexation playbook” in occupied areas.

President Joe Biden announced various climate-related executive actions, days after his proposed climate legislation ran aground in Congress. One directive promotes offshore wind development in the Gulf of Mexico, historically a site of oil-and-gas drilling, and in waters along America’s south-eastern coast. But Mr Biden stopped short of declaring a national climate-change emergency, as some activists had hoped. Such a decree would make more federal money available for mitigation efforts.

Tesla’s second-quarter profit declined from the first three months of the year, owing to covid-related shutdowns at its Shanghai factory and a parts shortage. The carmaker recorded revenues of $16.9bn. Net income was $2.3bn—nearly double its profit in the same period last year, but short of the record $3.3bn booked last quarter. Tesla aims to produce more than 1.5m vehicles this year, up by 60% from 2021.

The European Commission will urge member countries to cut gas usage by 15% amid fears of reduced supply from Russia. The emergency plan comes after Vladimir Putin said when Gazprom restarts supplies to Europe via the Nord Stream 1 pipeline on Thursday, it will be at a drastically reduced capacity. Officially the pipeline is closed for maintenance. Some suspect Russia is manipulating gas flows as a political tool in retaliation for the EU’s support of Ukraine.

Ukraine will ask international bondholders for a delay of two years in making its debt repayments​​—so it can put the money towards its defence against Russia. The Ukrainian government hopes to negotiate the deferral by the middle of August, before some $1.2bn of debt payments are due in early September. Ukraine’s GDP has fallen by an estimated 40% since Russia invaded in February.

Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss made it through to the final round of Britain’s Conservative leadership race; Penny Mordaunt was eliminated. The winner will replace Boris Johnson as prime minister. Ms Mordaunt received only 105 votes from Conservative MPs on Wednesday. Ms Truss, the foreign secretary, received 113 supporters; Mr Sunak, a former chancellor, led with 137. The final two candidates will now face a ballot of approximately 180,000 Conservative Party members, with the result expected on September 5th.

Fact of the day: 0.03, the number of deaths associated with one terawatt-hour of electricity produced from nuclear-power plants. Read the full article.

Putin keeps Europe guessing on gas

PHOTO: AP
For ten days European political and business leaders have held their breath, waiting to see whether Vladimir Putin would allow a gas pipeline to reopen as planned. Nord Stream 1, which carries more than one-third of Russia’s exports of natural gas to western Europe via Germany, was shut off on July 11th for scheduled maintenance work. It is due to reopen on Thursday. It seems as though it will, but at far from its normal capacity.

In June Russia reduced the volume of gas coming through the pipe by 60%. And Mr Putin has warned that it may be cut further. Russia’s president blames a gas turbine that was sent to Canada for repair. But Europe’s leaders suspect more nefarious motives.

Further disruption would intensify Europe’s soaring energy costs and add to spiralling inflation. The EU is preparing for the worst: the European Commission has drawn up a proposal for governments to cut gas consumption by 15%. A difficult winter lies ahead.

The ECB’s moment of truth

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The European Central Bank has said that it will on Thursday raise interest rates for the first time in 11 years. Dramatic inflation—prices rose at an annual rate of 8.6% in June—has forced its hand. Interest rates must rise to cool the euro zone’s economy.

But do not expect a big rate increase. The war in Ukraine has sparked an energy crisis, and most confidence indicators are already pointing to a slowdown. To strike a balance between cooling inflation and courting recession, the ECB will probably stick to its pre-announced plan of raising rates by a modest 0.25 percentage points.

Yet rates are only part of the job. The bank must also hash out the details of a bond-buying programme to ensure that the bond yields of highly indebted countries—particularly Italy—do not blow out, potentially triggering another Italian debt crisis. Italy itself is going through a bout of political uncertainty. This will test the political and legal limits of the ECB in designing such a scheme.


Turkey’s mad monetary theory

PHOTO: PRESS ASSOCIATION
In Brussels, Washington and London, the topic of conversation at central banks is not whether to raise interest rates to contain inflation, but by how much. In Ankara, things are different.

When Turkey’s central bank meets on Thursday, almost no one expects the rate-setters to increase rates at all. Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, believes that higher interest rates are the cause of high inflation, not a cure for it. Those who think otherwise, he recently said, “are either illiterates or traitors”. He has duly sacked three central-bank governors who disagree.

Evidence is not on Mr Erdogan’s side. Inflation in Turkey has surged to almost 80% since the bank slashed interest rates late last year, putting pressure on consumers. A recent poll found that more than one-third of Turks are unable to meet their basic needs. But there is no sign of a U-turn. Expect, then, interest rates in Turkey to remain unchanged on Thursday—because Mr Erdogan says so.

The last episode of the January 6th hearings

PHOTO: DPA
On Thursday the eighth and final hearing of the congressional January 6th committee will take place—on prime-time television. The committee, set up to investigate the storming in 2021 of the Capitol by supporters of Donald Trump, has been methodical. Millions of people have watched each of its hearings, tuning in to hear a familiar story lent texture by damning detail. They have heard allegations of schemes to pressure Mike Pence, the vice-president, into stealing the election; to remove the attorney-general; and even to force the Secret Service to bring Mr Trump to the Capitol while the attack was under way.

Thursday’s hearing will dissect the former president’s inaction over the course of the day. The committee’s aim has plainly been to sketch out the contours of a potential federal prosecution of Mr Trump. A separate grand-jury probe in the state of Georgia is also advancing. The shadow of the 2020 election will loom over American politics for a good while longer.

A marvellous return for Comic-Con

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
For the first time since the pandemic, over 100,000 nerds, many dressed as their favourite characters, will descend on San Diego for Comic-Con, a jamboree for fans of caped crusaders, animated robots and toys of all kinds. Geek culture has lost some of its lustre in the past three years, thanks to a glut of films set within the Marvel Cinematic Universe. But at SDCC, which starts on Thursday, studios will do their best to impress.

Attendees can expect glimpses of a “Dungeons and Dragons” movie, a “Game of Thrones” spin-off and Amazon’s $1bn “Lord of the Rings” television series. But the stars of the convention will, as usual, be superheroes. DC, which owns Batman and Superman, has teased trailers for “Black Adam” and a second Shazam film. And though Disney, whose ownership of Marvel makes it the market leader of comic-book geekery, will likely save the biggest announcements for its own expo in September, it will still have plenty to show off. Expect a trailer for the new Black Panther film to set the internet ablaze.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which 1950s American sitcom was voted the best TV show of all time in a 2012 poll?

Wednesday: Which scientist won the Nobel peace prize as well as a Nobel for chemistry?

Easy writing makes hard reading.

Ernest Hemingway
