The world in brief
August 17, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A cargo ship left Odessa, a Ukrainian Black Sea port, after being trapped there since Russia’s full-scale invasion began in February 2022. Last week Ukraine announced a new corridor in the Black Sea to release merchant ships stuck in its ports, despite Russia having given no assurances of safe passage. Russia has threatened to treat all ships leaving Ukrainian ports as military targets.

An American appeals court restricted access to mifepristone, an abortion drug. Its ruling would bar users from obtaining the pill by post and telemedicine prescriptions, but not ban the drug altogether, as a lower court in Texas had done. The order will not go into effect immediately; the Supreme Court ruled in the spring that the drug must remain available while litigation works through the courts.

Minutes from the Federal Reserve’s meeting in July showed that central bankers were split over future interest-rate hikes. Members weighed the risks of spurring a recession with more tightening against the “significant upside risks to inflation” that most continued to see. Markets fell on the report’s release. The Fed will make its next interest-rate decision at its meeting in September.

China in effect scuppered a planned $5.4bn acquisition by Intel, an American semiconductor giant with long-standing operations in China, of Tower Semiconductor, an Israeli chip manufacturer. China’s antitrust regulators failed to rule on the transaction within the companies’ set deadline, prompting Intel to call off the deal. It is the latest sign of deteriorating business relations between China and America.

Thailand’s constitutional court rejected an appeal by Move Forward that claimed that efforts to prevent its leader becoming prime minister were unconstitutional. The party won the most parliamentary seats in the general election in May, but Pita Limjaroenrat’s nomination had been blocked by the military-controlled senate. Instead, Move Forward’s former pro-democracy coalition partner, Pheu Thai, is considering a deal with pro-military parties.

Germany’s government backed draft legislation that would allow adults to own up to 25g of cannabis for personal consumption.The legislation could be approved by the end of the year, making Germany one of the first major European countries to legalise the drug. German law criminalises purchases of cannabis, though not its consumption.

Researchers reported for the first time that transplanted pig kidneys—genetically modified to work better in humans—performed life-sustaining functions in brain-dead human patients. Separately, surgeons in New York, apparently responding to the report, said that in one case a pig kidney was still performing well 32 days after it was transplanted. Scientists hope that the approach can help the estimated 2m people living with kidney failure.

Figure of the day: 237m, the number of Muslims in Indonesia, the world’s largest Muslim-majority country. Read the full story.


PHOTO: EPA
Diplomacy or intervention for Niger
On Thursday army chiefs from a dozen west African countries meet again to plan a possible military intervention in Niger. The Economic Community of West African States, a regional group, wants to reinstate Niger’s president, Mohamed Bazoum, who was ousted in a coup on July 26th. Last week the bloc ordered the deployment of a standby force to restore constitutional order in Niger. But it also promised to keep pursuing diplomatic solutions.

Niger’s generals are digging in. They say they will prosecute Mr Bazoum, who is being held hostage, for high treason. The bloc called this a “provocation”. Yet armed intervention by ECOWAS is looking less likely. The African Union and America, which wants to keep its drone bases in Niger, seem to be growing sceptical of the idea.

To facilitate a face-saving fudge the junta might offer a few low-cost gestures. It recently appointed a civilian prime minister and may make (questionable) promises of prompt elections. Should the junta also free Mr Bazoum, that may yet be enough for ECOWAS.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Australia’s governing party confers
Australia’s centre-left Labor Party has reasons to celebrate when it gathers for its triennial conference in Brisbane on Thursday. Since it won the federal election last year, a red wave has swept the country. Labor now holds office in every state and territory in the country, except the island of Tasmania. Despite inflation and a slowing economy the federal government, led by Anthony Albanese, remains as popular as when it was first elected.

But the biggest test is still to come. Mr Albanese has staked his reputation on a referendum to enshrine an indigenous “Voice to Parliament” in the constitution and to give Australia’s first people a greater say over policy. But support for the proposed body is falling. Most Australians are now against it, because they are unsure what the vote is about or believe it will not help Aboriginal people. Should the proposal be defeated, Mr Albanese stands to lose more than his Voice.


PHOTO: DAVE SYMONDS
How healthy is Japan’s economy?
The picture of Japan’s economic health is becoming clearer this week. The world’s third-largest economy grew at an annualised rate of 6% in the latest quarter, according to statistics released on Tuesday. The balance of trade will be published on Thursday, followed by inflation figures on Friday.

The vital signs are strong. Booming exports pushed the latest growth figures far beyond the 2.9% annualised gain that economists had forecast. And wages this year have risen at their fastest pace in decades. Japan appears close to breaking with decades of low inflation and even deflation.

But other symptoms are worrying. Wage growth has trailed inflation for much of this year, which means pay cuts in real terms. That, along with a weak yen, has dampened consumer spending. Domestic consumption fell during the second quarter, as did imports. And export-driven growth could be jeopardised by economic uncertainty in Japan’s biggest trading partners, America and China. It is too soon to give the all clear.



PHOTO: ALAMY
Spain’s influential separatists
Spain’s new parliament convenes on Thursday in a moment of high drama. The election on July 23rd left neither the left- nor the right-wing alliances with a majority of seats. The rest are held by various regionalist—and mostly separatist—parties. The formal agenda on Thursday is to elect presiding officers for the lower house. But the real issue is which way those nationalists break. This should give a signal as to who might form a government—or whether new elections are needed.

For Pedro Sánchez, the serving Socialist prime minister, to keep running the country he needs the support of at least five other parties. That may include some which want to break Spain up. Junts per Catalunya (“Together for Catalonia”) is one of two parties wanting independence for the region. Its leader, Carles Puigdemont, in exile since an illegal independence referendum in 2017, has tweeted cryptically of an “auction” for his support. The price may become evident on Thursday.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Orwell’s mistreatment of women
George Orwell dealt with authoritarianism close up. He helped to run the British Empire in Burma, battled Franco’s fascists in Spain and worked to defeat Hitler at the BBC. Yet while railing against “doublethink”, in which both everything and the opposite are equally true, he was blind to a different kind of tyranny.

Letters from his first wife, Eileen, to a friend, reveal a man who treated women badly. Eileen O’Shaughnessy was married to Orwell from 1936 until her death in 1945. An Oxford graduate, she gave up further studies to serve as his editor, nurse, breadwinner and housekeeper in often appalling conditions. Yet she is barely mentioned in his writing.

Anna Funder calls this hypocrisy out in “Wifedom: Mrs Orwell’s Invisible Life”, which is published on Thursday in Britain. As the author of “Stasiland”, on the East German secret police, Ms Funder also knows totalitarianism. Patriarchy, she writes, is just as much “a vast system of mental cheating” as those tyrannies Orwell so memorably described.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: What is the largest ice shelf in Antarctica, at almost 500,000 square kilometres?

Wednesday: What is the name for a baby kangaroo?

Everybody is interesting for an hour, but few people can last more than two.

V. S. Naipaul
