The world in brief June 4, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 01:06 GMT+1 / 08:06 Hong Kong

Investigators in Ukraine gathering information about possible war crimes are examining allegations that children were forcibly deported to Russia, as part of a potential genocide indictment. Ukraine’s former human-rights chief has previously said that Russia has relocated 210,000 children during the conflict. Meanwhile, Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said Russian forces have seized a fifth of his country, as the war entered its 100th day. He also said Ukrainian forces have had “some success” in the besieged city of Severodonetsk.

Germany’s Bundestag approved a special defense fund worth €100bn ($110bn) to modernize its army, an initiative prompted by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Creating the fund required a constitutional amendment—and thus a two-thirds majority in parliament—to sidestep ordinary borrowing limits. The money should boost German defense spending from around 1.5% of GDP to the NATO standard of at least 2%.

American prosecutors charged Peter Navarro, a former adviser to ex-president Donald Trump, with contempt of Congress for failing to comply with its probe of the Capitol riot. Mr. Navarro refused to testify before congressional investigators about the attack of January 6, 2021, claiming his communications with Mr. Trump were covered by executive privilege. The two charges each carry maximum penalties of a year in prison and a $100,000 fine.

David McCormick, a former hedge-fund executive, conceded to Mehmet Oz in the Republican Senate primary election in Pennsylvania. Just a few hundred ballots had separated the two candidates, forcing a recount after the vote on May 17. Dr Oz, a celebrity television doctor, was endorsed by Mr. Trump. He will face John Fetterman, the state’s Democratic lieutenant-governor, in the general election in November.

The American economy added 390,000 jobs in May, the fewest for 13 months but more than economists had expected. The unemployment rate remained at 3.6%. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported “notable job gains” in leisure and hospitality, a sector in which employers have been short of staff as the economy has recovered from the covid-19 pandemic.

Annual inflation in Turkey hit 73.5% in May, a 24-year high, up from 70% in April. Food is more than 90% dearer than a year ago. Many countries are suffering from soaring prices but Turkey’s predicament has been worsened by President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s insistence on keeping interest rates low. The central bank has cut rates by five percentage points since September.

Estonia’s prime minister removed the junior coalition partner from her government. Kaja Kallas, who leads the center-right Reform Party, said that “the security situation in Europe” made it impossible to work with the center-left Center Party, which used to have formal links to Vladimir Putin’s party in neighboring Russia. She accused it of “actively working against Estonia’s core values.” Ms. Kallas’s party has enjoyed a surge in popularity since the outbreak of war in Ukraine.

Word of the Week: écoponts, “wildlife bridges” in French. France is building overpasses for animals to reduce roadkill and help them roam more freely. 

The shape of America’s coming recession
America will be lucky to avoid a recession in the next couple of years. As the Federal Reserve aggressively raises interest rates to contain inflation, downward pressure on growth will be intense. No two recessions are alike. America’s most recent two—the global financial crisis of 2007-09 and the shuddering start to the covid-19 pandemic—were bruising. There is reason for cautious optimism that a coming recession will be milder.

Households have ample savings, partly thanks to stimulus payments during the pandemic. An ultra-tight labor market may cushion people from unemployment. Many companies also have insulation after locking in lower borrowing costs. Banks, meanwhile, have better buffers, making them safer than 15 years ago. Instead, the concern is over how policymakers respond. After battling high inflation, there may be little appetite in Washington for a big fiscal or monetary push to revive growth. The stars are aligned for a shallow recession but a tepid recovery.

Is big tech’s red-hot jobs market cooling off?
“Can I keep the monitor and mouse?” a fired tech worker recently asked on Blind, an anonymous social-media platform where techies go to compare notes on employers. As America’s technology giants contend with a looming recession and sliding share prices, many in the industry worry that the sizzling market for tech jobs is cooling. This year listed tech firms worth a combined $3.4trn have announced hiring freezes or firings. The commotion comes after a prolonged boom in the sector.

So far redundancies, rather than just hiring freezes, have been largely confined to startups and newly listed firms. Sackings at established tech companies have been modest. Demand for the most prized skills, such as understanding of advanced data science, is so high that people who possess them will be sought out even in a downturn. That will not stop the anxiety level on Blind from staying elevated for a while.

“Borgen” returns
If “The West Wing” set the standard for television series about American politics, the Danish series “Borgen” did so for European parliamentary democracies. Fans of the plucky prime minister, Birgitte Nyborg, were bereft when the third season ended in 2013. Now she is back: on Thursday the fourth season began on Netflix, after airing earlier in Denmark.

As in the real Europe, much has changed. Scheming male politicians have ceded to scheming female ones. Center-left leaders like Ms. Nyborg clash with younger, woker colleagues. Social media has spawned a new generation of spin doctors. The main plot, featuring an oil discovery off Greenland, pits environmentalism against indigenous rights and pulls in Russia, America and China. Many saw in the early series of “Borgen” a complex portrait of a country exemplifying the ideals of social democracy. In the new series those ideals are a bit harder to find.

Weekend Profile: Chesa Boudin, San Francisco’s prosecutor who dislikes prosecuting
The job of district attorney in San Francisco can vault people to high places. It used to be held by Kamala Harris, America’s vice-president. However, if Chesa Boudin, San Francisco’s current DA, is going anywhere, it is back onto the job market. On June 7 voters will decide whether to “recall” him from office. San Franciscans blame him for a spike in homicides. They say he has failed to rein in open-air drug dealing and clean up homeless encampments.

Mr. Boudin surely has the most unusual background of any DA in America. His parents were members of the Weather Underground, a leftist group, and were both convicted for their role in an armed robbery that left two police officers and a security guard dead. (They were the unarmed getaway drivers.) Mr. Boudin was raised by the group’s leaders, making frequent visits to prison to see his parents and developing an intimate knowledge of the criminal-justice system.

After graduating from college, he went to Venezuela and worked as a translator for Hugo Chávez, the country’s autocratic left-wing president, and co-wrote a book about the Bolivarian revolution. One of Mr Boudin’s articles from the time argued the world should “congratulate” Mr Chávez for abolishing term limits. He went on to study at Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar, attended Yale Law School and became a public defender. When campaigning to become San Francisco’s DA in 2019, he promised to eliminate cash bail and lock up fewer people. But many in the city now feel his policies have let miscreants operate without consequence. Murders and burglaries are up. In 2021, his office secured just three convictions for drug-dealing, compared with 90 by his predecessor in 2018.

Mr Boudin says the recall campaign against him is politically motivated and funded by Republicans. Yet people of all backgrounds are irked by the city’s deterioration under his watch. Whether or not Mr Boudin is able to hold on to his job (polls suggest his removal is likely), his call to treat criminals and ex-convicts more humanely has changed lives. That includes his father’s. Mr Boudin sought clemency for his dad, who was locked up in New York, and publicly made his case to Andrew Cuomo, then the state’s governor. Last year Mr Boudin’s father was pardoned, after serving 40 years of a 75-year sentence.


The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Jin-Hong Park, Suwon, South Korea

North America: Melissa Markham, Austin, United States

Central and South America: George Power Porto, Lima, Peru

Europe: Patrice Bailly, Aix en Provence, France

Africa: Ailsa Green, Choma, Zambia

Oceania: Alison Morris, Sydney, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Gareth Bale, Key West, Buster Keaton, Val d’Isère and Rosemary Clooney. The theme is actors who played Batman: Christian Bale, Adam West, Michael Keaton, Val Kilmer and George Clooney.


