The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (23:53 GMT / 07:53 Hong Kong)

During Emmanuel Macron’s state visit to America, Joe Biden said he was “prepared to speak with” Vladmir Putin, as Mr Macron has, if the Russian president signalled an interest in ending the war in Ukraine. Mr Biden also said he would address “glitches” in the Inflation Reduction Act, a packet of subsidies for clean energy that the French president fears will disadvantage European manufacturers.

Inflation in America rose less than expected in October, according to the metric favoured by the Federal Reserve. The “core” personal-consumption expenditures price index, which excludes food and energy, increased by 0.2% from the previous month, after having risen by 0.5% in September. Personal spending jumped by 0.8% in October, a sign that consumers appear undaunted by rising interest rates.

The EU council’s president, Charles Michel, raised “the response of societies” to covid-19 measures during a meeting with the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, in Beijing, an apparent reference to the widespread protests in China. Mr Michel also brought up Ukraine and Taiwan, according to his spokesperson. On Wednesday Chongqing and Guangzhou, two of China’s biggest cities, said that they would ease some covid restrictions.

Russia continued its attacks on the eastern Donbas region, the area of most intense fighting, while also bombing Kherson in the south, the Ukrainian army said. Meanwhile, NATO foreign ministers agreed to bolster support for Bosnia, Georgia and Moldova. And America signed a $1.2bn contract to purchase six NASAMS air-defence systems for Ukraine; it will send eight in total.

A federal appeals-court panel ruled that documents seized from Donald Trump’s Florida estate need not be reviewed by an independent arbiter. The decision removes an obstacle in the justice department’s investigation into whether America’s former president mishandled state secrets. The arbiter, known as a “special master”, had been empowered by a district-court judge to keep from investigators any material covered by executive privilege or attorney-client privilege.

Spain said that six letter-bombs were sent to addresses across the country in recent days: Pedro Sánchez, the prime minister, and Margarita Robles, the defence minister, were among the intended targets. One device sent to the Ukrainian embassy in Madrid injured a security officer on Wednesday. Spanish officials said the bombs were homemade and had been sent from inside the country.

Football World Cup: Japan stunned Spain with a 2-1 win. Both countries advanced to the knockout stage. The surprise outcome means that Germany, though it triumphed over Costa Rica 4-2, failed to make the requisite number of goals to advance. Earlier Australia shocked Denmark to secure a place in the knockout round for only the second time in the team’s history.

Fact of the day: 5%, the proportion of Britons that now regularly go to church. Read the full story.

The Trump Organisation on trial

PHOTO: AP
On Friday the closing arguments in a criminal trial of two units of the Trump Organisation are expected to conclude. The real-estate company owned by Donald Trump, a former president, is charged with crimes including conspiracy, tax fraud and falsifying business records. Jurors heard Allen Weisselberg, the company’s chief financial officer, admit to concealing $1.76m of “bonus” income, including payment of rent for an apartment and private-school tuition. Donald Bender, who managed the organisation’s taxes for 35 years, said that he “probably would have had a heart attack” had he known about the payments.

Prosecutors allege that the company engaged in a long-running tax-avoidance scheme. The defence maintains that neither Mr Trump (who is not charged with wrongdoing) or his family knew, and that the company did not benefit from it. But, if convicted on all counts, the Trump Organisation could face $1.6m in fines. Separately, New York State’s attorney-general has filed a lawsuit against Mr Trump and his family, which accuses them of “staggering fraud” and seeks damages of at least $250m. They deny the charges. That case is expected to go to trial next year, as Mr Trump’s presidential campaign gets going.

British politicians visit Taiwan

PHOTO: AP
On Friday a group of British lawmakers will conclude a visit to Taiwan designed in part to assess the effectiveness (or not) of Britain’s foreign policy in the region. They met Tsai Ing-wen, the president, to affirm Britain’s “strong cultural and trading ties” with the self-governing island that China regards as part of its territory.

The British delegation is the latest in a string of international guests that Ms Tsai has welcomed since a visit by Nancy Pelosi, the speaker of America’s House of Representatives, enraged China in August. Ms Tsai has been keen to demonstrate her strength as a leader who can garner the global support necessary to fend off an increasingly bellicose China. But after her party’s drubbing in local elections last week she resigned as party leader and will cede some of her platform to her successor. British politicians are increasingly hawkish on China. But they may find a Taiwanese leader who is, at least for now, deflated rather than defiant.

Pakistan’s $1bn repayment deadline

PHOTO: ALAMY
Jameel Ahmad, the governor of Pakistan’s central bank, sounded confident last week when he promised that Pakistan would repay a $1bn international bond by Friday—three days before it matures on December 5th. If that deadline is met, it will send a signal to international lenders that the country retains some degree of fiscal stability.

It needs to: Pakistan’s economy is in tatters. The lingering effects of the covid pandemic, rocketing energy prices and the previous government’s economic mismanagement were compounded over the summer when an unusually strong monsoon deluged the country, causing more than $30bn of damage and financial losses. Annual inflation was at 23.8% in November. The government is trying to persuade the IMF to release more bail-out funds. But the IMF wants proof that officials are making progress on a plan to rebuild after the floods. Pakistan will need an awful lot more than confidence to get out of its current predicament.

A famous Christmas painting returns in London

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week “The Nativity” by Piero della Francesca, one of the most popular paintings in London’s National Gallery, returns to public view after three years’ absence. Painted around 1480, this Christmas-card favourite shows an angelic boy-band serenading the infant Jesus and his blue-robed mother against a luminous Tuscan landscape. Rugged shepherds and farmyard beasts complete the familiar, charming scene. Yet scholars have long lamented the sorry state of the oil-painted panel, which was purchased by the gallery in 1874. Much of the paint had faded and the figures lacked shadows. Plus the bald, sandy foreground led some experts to declare the painting unfinished.

The three-year restoration project, led by Jill Dunkerton, the gallery’s senior restorer, has healed the wounds inflicted by clumsy 19th-century cleaners. It has also confirmed that the painting is complete. Piero envisaged that earthy Tuscan hilltop as bare and shadowless: an uncluttered stage to better show the brilliant mystic light of Jesus’s birth. Art-lovers can now get even more enjoyment from Piero’s blend of the miraculous and the mundane.

The rubbish problem of plastic pollution

PHOTO: AP
The first round of negotiations over a global plastic-pollution treaty will conclude in Uruguay on Friday. In March 175 countries endorsed the idea of a UN accord governing plastic waste, which has been found everywhere from the deepest part of the ocean to the tip of Mount Everest. Delegates gathered this week in Punta del Este, a beach town, to decide what the accord should say.

Some parties—including Britain, Canada, the EU and Switzerland—want the final treaty to be binding, and to set a goal of stopping plastic pollution by 2040. America agrees with the aim but favours voluntary action and doesn’t want new curbs on production. Some 19% of the world’s plastic is made in North America, 31% in China.

Plastic pollution causes about $100bn-worth of damages and clean-up costs each year, according to one estimate. Just 9% of the stuff is recycled. But countries have until the end of 2024 to finalise an accord. An effective one is far from being in the bag.


Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which Nathaniel Hawthorne novel tells the story of Hester Prynne?

Thursday: Which San Francisco park hosted a Beatles concert in 1966 as well as a Paul McCartney gig (the last event at the site) in 2014?

Crossword winners

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The three winners, chosen at random, were:

Ravikiran Kota, Houston, United States

Alessandro Cologni, Bergamo, Italy

Nikharika Mittra, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

They all gave the correct answers of Anwar Ibrahim, Arabic, Intel and Madrid. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Life has a practice of living you, if you don't live it.

Philip Larkin
