The world in brief
September 1, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Donald Trump pleaded not guilty to charges of racketeering brought against him by prosecutors in Georgia, who accuse him of trying to overturn the 2020 presidential election results tgere. Mr Trump waived his right to be present at an in-person arraignment next week, as did several of his 18 acolytes. In total, Mr Trump is facing four prominent indictments.

At least 74 people were killed and 50 injured in a fire in a multi-storey building in downtown Johannesburg, South Africa’s biggest city. Officials said that the cause of the blaze was unclear, but noted that a locked gate prevented some occupants from leaving the building. Many living there were undocumented migrants from neighbouring countries.

The annual rate of inflation in the euro zone was 5.3% in August, the same as in July. In France, meanwhile, the inflation rate rose to 5.7% in the year to August, up from 5.1% in July, largely because of higher energy prices. Stubborn inflation has caused much speculation over whether the European Central Bank will raise interest rates again in September.

UBS, Switzerland’s biggest bank, confirmed that it would absorb the domestic business of Credit Suisse after its takeover of its rival in March, despite local opposition to the new megabank’s size. The bank also said it would cut 3,000 jobs in Switzerland, in order to achieve $10bn in savings by 2026. It reported a second-quarter profit of $29bn.

The contents of an annual form filed by Clarence Thomas, a Supreme Court justice, were made public. Mr Thomas disclosed flights on private jets and meals provided by Harlan Crow, a Republican mega-donor. Mr Thomas acknowledged that he had “inadvertently omitted” some of this information—including the sale of several properties to Mr Crow in 2014—from previous disclosures.

America approved $80m of military aid to Taiwan. The package represents the first time America has sent aid to Taiwan under the so-called Foreign Military Financing programme, which is usually reserved for sovereign states. The move could anger China, which claims the self-governing island as its own. America called its decision “necessary” in helping Taiwan maintain “a sufficient self-defence capability”.

Army officers who seized power in Gabon said that General Brice Oligui Nguema would be sworn in as the transitional leader of the west African country on Monday. General Nguema is the former head of the Gabonese Republican Guard, the country’s most powerful security unit. He is reportedly a cousin of Gabon’s ousted president, Ali Bongo, who is under house arrest.

Figure of the day: 14, the number of attempted or successful coups globally since 2020. In the 2000s there were just 22. Read the full story.

Figure of the day: 14, the number of attempted or successful coups globally since 2020. In the 2000s there were just 22. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Singaporeans’ constrained presidential choice
On Friday Singaporeans choose their new president. The winner will have partial veto power over the spending of Singapore’s huge (but undisclosed) reserves. Beyond that, though, the role is mostly symbolic: the president is meant to have no political affiliation.

In reality, presidential candidates are approved by a government-appointed committee according to strict criteria and are often establishment figures. Tharman Shanmugaratnam, the front-runner, is a former deputy prime minister who was also a minister for both finance and education. He is trailed by Ng Kok Song, once chief investor for the sovereign-wealth fund, and Tan Kin Lian, who ran the insurance arm of the country’s trade unions.

Yet Singaporeans—for whom voting is mandatory—still have a little leeway to make their feelings known. A large number of spoiled ballots or a good showing by anyone other than Mr Shanmugaratnam will be interpreted as a sign of dissatisfaction with the ruling People’s Action Party, which favours him.


PHOTO: AP
America’s jobs boom slows down
The American labour market may finally be cooling off. Data released on Friday are expected to show that the economy added about 170,000 jobs in August, making it the third consecutive month below the 200,000 mark—something which has not happened since 2019.

The unemployment rate is likely to remain close to 3.5%, hovering just above a five-decade low. But the extreme imbalance in the labour market is starting to improve. Figures earlier this week showed that there were about 8.8m job openings last month, well down from the high of 12m in early 2022.

A gradual slowdown in hiring is exactly what the Federal Reserve wants to see. The hope is that this will enable companies to attract and retain workers without having to offer big salary boosts that end up feeding through into inflation. The Fed is not about to declare victory—but it must be feeling pleased with the direction of travel.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Pope Francis’s Mongolian mission
Pope Francis arrives in Ulaanbaatar on Friday for an intriguing trip to Mongolia. Even members of the tiny Catholic community (1,340 souls, 0.04% of the population) say they are baffled, if delighted. The official line is that he wants to show no corner of the Catholic world is too small or remote to merit the pope’s attention. But is that all?

Mongolia is sandwiched between Russia and China, and the Vatican is keen to sort out relations with both countries. It is probably no coincidence that Bishop Stephen Chow of Hong Kong (who visited Beijing earlier this year) will be in Mongolia with a delegation at the same time as Francis. And there is speculation that the trip could somehow fit into the pope’s efforts to mediate between Russia and Ukraine. They have not gone well: in August he upset many Ukrainians by appearing to praise two monarchs who embodied Russia’s imperialist expansionism.


PHOTO: AP
An economic evaluation for Lula
Brazil’s GDP figures for the second quarter are due on Friday. The first quarter saw a rise of 1.9%, driven by a bumper harvest. Analysts expect a more modest increase of up to 0.5% this time around. Optimism for 2023 as a whole, though, is rising: growth of 2.31% is now predicted, up from earlier forecasts of 0.89%.

That is good news for Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Brazil’s president. Lula took office in January amid fears of a spending spree like the one that characterised his party’s last stint in government (which ended in a recession in 2016). Instead, the economy looks rosier than before. The inflation rate, which hit 12% in 2022, is at 3.99%. Unemployment, at 7.9%, is at its lowest level since 2014. But analysts remain sceptical about the longer term. Predictions for GDP growth for 2024 and 2025 remain stuck below 2%.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Football’s transfer deadline day
For football fans in England, the summer transfer window—when European clubs can buy and sell players—is becoming both more exciting and eye-watering. Premier League teams have forked out a record £2.1bn ($2.7bn) on new stars this year, beating the record set in 2022, according to Transfermarkt, a football-statistics website. Expect more deals by Friday night, when the window for the men’s game shuts.

Elsewhere, spending is not so freewheeling. Clubs in France, Germany, Italy and Spain have spent less combined this year than in 2019, as revenues fail to keep pace with the Premier League.

The challenge to the Premier League’s financial dominance now comes from a tough new opponent: the state-backed Saudi Pro League. From relative obscurity, it has become the second-highest spending league globally, shelling out £725m so far this summer, £260m of it on players from the Premier League, estimates Transfermarkt. And Saudi clubs are not done yet. Their transfer window remains open until September 20th.



Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: What is the term for the politicians that enforce party discipline in both the British and American legislatures, as well as many others?

Thursday: What is the famous phrase used to refer to the speech given by Martin Luther King in August 1963 at the end of a March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Jane Cunha, Florianopolis, Brazil

Corien Kershey, Ottawa, Canada

Tim Densem, Hamilton, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of Bangladesh, BRICS, lady and hedge. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Reform can be accomplished only when attitudes are changed.

Lillian Wald
