The world in brief
June 13, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The Kremlin said it had signed a contract with the Akhmat group, a Chechen paramilitary organisation, that would bring it under the defence ministry’s control. The announcement comes a day after Yevgeny Prigozhin (pictured), the head of Wagner group, a Russian mercenary outfit, said his fighters would sign no such contract. Mr Prigozhin is in a long-running feud with the defence ministry, which he accuses of incompetence. Meanwhile Ukraine claimed to have liberated a fourth village from Russian forces in the eastern region of Donetsk.

Silvio Berlusconi, Italy’s former prime minister, died aged 86, after battling leukaemia. Mr Berlusconi, a flamboyant media magnate, led four governments for the centre-right Forza Italia party between 1994 and 2011. His career was rocked by sex scandals, corruption allegations and a conviction for tax fraud. He had returned to Italy’s upper house, the Senate, after a national election in September.

America’s Federal Trade Commission will reportedly seek to block Microsoft from acquiring Activision Blizzard, the game studio that makes “Call of Duty”. The FTC will file for an injunction to prevent the $69bn deal, due to go through in July, arguing that the merger could allow the tech giant to suppress consumer choice. British regulators earlier blocked the deal; the EU has approved it.

JPMorgan Chase agreed to pay $290m to settle a class-action lawsuit with one of Jeffrey Epstein’s victims, who claims it profited from Mr Epstein’s abuse. The American bank still faces litigation with its former executive Jes Staley and the US Virgin Islands’ government. Last month Deutsche Bank, where Mr Epstein was also a client, agreed to pay $75m to settle a similar lawsuit.

Fox News told Tucker Carlson to stop airing content on Twitter, sending the former prime-time host a cease-and-desist letter. Since the network sacked him in April, Mr Carlson has filmed two segments for the social-media site. Fox is still paying Mr Carlson and says they are a violation of his contract, which runs through 2024.

UBS imposed strict restrictions on Credit Suisse after the Swiss bank completed the takeover of its rival. Prohibited “red-line” activities include a ban on new clients from high-risk countries such as Russia. Credit Suisse’s final years as an independent bank were marred by scandals, which an internal report blamed on a “lackadaisical attitude towards risk”.

Radio New Zealand, a public-service broadcaster, suspended an employee as it investigated the editing of news-wire reports to include pro-Russian narratives about the war in Ukraine. RNZ identified at least 16 reports from wire services including Reuters that had unattributed additions, complete with references to American-backed coups and “neo-Nazi elements” in Ukraine. The company’s chief executive called the rewrites “pro-Kremlin garbage”.

Figure of the day: 9,000, the number of Chinese firms hit by Western sanctions. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Donald Trump heads to criminal court, again
On Tuesday Donald Trump, the only former American president who has been criminally indicted, is set to record yet another first. When he appears at Wilkie D. Ferguson Jr. Courthouse in Miami, he will be the only president to be arraigned in federal court—possibly by a judge whom he appointed when he was president. Mr Trump is charged with 37 felonies for allegedly mishandling classified documents (storing them, for instance, in the ballroom of his Mar-a-Lago estate) and obstructing federal authorities’ investigation. Mr Trump rails against the indictment. Over the weekend he warned his supporters that federal officials are “coming after you”.

Concerns about disorder are warranted: the local chapter of Proud Boys, a white-supremcist group, is reportedly organising a rally outside the courthouse. Mr Trump’s arraignment in lower Manhattan in April was a chaotic, but ultimately peaceful, circus. Security officials will be hoping the same is true in Miami.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Artificial intelligence gets its first law
On Tuesday the European Parliament will discuss, and then a day later vote on, what will be the world’s first comprehensive law to regulate artificial intelligence: the AI Act. Lawmakers want to regulate AI systems based on the harm they can cause, for instance by making impact assessments mandatory for the most risky ones. The bill will probably not fully come into effect before 2025. The various branches of the EU’s bureaucracy need to agree on a final version.

Still, tech firms may end up complying with parts of the AIA before it is fully in force. The rules are also expected to influence a joint “Code of Conduct” on the technology that the EU and America announced in late May. Another hope is that the act will inform debate about AI regulation within the G7 group of rich democracies, which also includes Britain, Canada and Japan. If everything goes according to plan—a big “if”—technology will for once not leave policy in the dust.


PHOTO: ALAMY
American inflation tees up rate “skip”
Inflation remains uncomfortably high in America. Figures released on Tuesday are expected to show that core prices—stripping out volatile food and energy costs—rose by 0.4% in May from April. That is equivalent to an annualised rate of nearly 5%, more than double the Federal Reserve’s target. Headline inflation probably slowed, largely thanks to falling energy prices.

The price data come as the Fed gathers for a two-day meeting. A decision about interest rates is due on Wednesday. Normally, high inflation would oblige the bank to raise rates again. But many analysts contend that the economy has yet to feel the effect of the past year’s aggressive tightening, arguing that rates are already restrictive enough. The Fed may thus strike a balance: keeping rates steady, but describing that decision as a “skip” rather than a “pause”. In other words, it may resume raising rates as soon as next month if inflation stays high.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Honduras’s president visits China
On Tuesday Xiomara Castro, Honduras’s president, wraps up a six-day state visit to China, her first since the countries established diplomatic relations in March. That followed her government’s decision to ditch Taiwan, a self-governing island that China claims as its own. Ms Castro attended the opening of Honduras’s embassy in Beijing and requested admission for her country to the New Development Bank, a Shanghai-based bank founded by members of the BRICS, a bloc of big emerging economies.

Latin America’s growing openness to China is causing alarm in Washington. China’s investments pay little heed to environmental or labour regulations. And its economic interests are developing into security ties. Last week reports emerged that Cuba had agreed to host a Chinese spying base. American and Cuban officials denied the story, though the New York Times later suggested that such a base had existed since 2019, citing an unnamed source in the Biden administration. Whatever the truth, many analysts think the reports are a sign of things to come in the region.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Italian politics after Berlusconi
After the death on Monday of Silvio Berlusconi, who was a key figure in Italian politics for almost 30 years, politicians will begin to figure out what his absence means. One consequence could be friction within Giorgia Meloni’s right-wing coalition, which includes Forza Italia, the party Mr Berlusconi founded and led. Although it is polling at just 7%, FI has enough deputies and senators to be essential to the government’s control of parliament.

Mr Berlusconi repeatedly shrank from naming a successor. An obvious candidate is the foreign minister, Antonio Tajani, who has been an EU commissioner and president of the European Parliament. But last year, Mr Berlusconi complicated matters with a “symbolic marriage” (an exchange of rings with no legal effect) to Marta Fascina, a young FI lawmaker. She has since reportedly worked to secure control of the party. Without its charismatic leader, FI may simply disintegrate. In any event, its parliamentarians are now up for grabs by the other coalition parties.

No one has ever become poor by giving.

Anne Frank
