The world in brief
July 12, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

 

 

Members of NATO issued a communiqué from their summit in Vilnius, Lithuania, waiving the need for Ukraine to complete the “Membership Action Plan”, a formal pre-entry step, before joining the alliance. The statement recognised the “substantial progress” that Ukraine had made in enacting democratic and military reforms. The waiving of MAP means that Ukraine can join NATO “when Allies agree and conditions are met”.

The communiqué also said that China’s “coercive policies challenge” NATO members’ security, and called on China not to provide lethal aid to Russia. As countries pledged fresh support to Ukraine, the statement also reiterated members’ commitment to invest 2% of annual GDP on defence. NATO’s chief, Jens Stoltenberg, hailed the defence plans approved at the summit as the most “comprehensive” since the cold war.

America’s Federal Trade Commission lost its request for an injunction pausing Microsoft’s purchase of Activision, a video-game developer. The tie-up now looks set to close by July 18th. The presiding judge said that the trustbuster was unlikely to prevail on its claim that the merger will lessen competition; consumers, she said, may get more access to Activision games.

German inflation rose in June, bucking its steady downward trend so far this year. When harmonised to compare with other EU countries, consumer prices increased by 6.8% from June 2022, according to the federal statistics agency. The rebound is mainly the consequence of rising transport costs, and the German government’s inflation-suppressing attempts to combat rising fuel prices last year.

A group of scientists believes that a lake in Ontario, Canada provides the best evidence that Earth may have entered a new geological era, the Anthropocene epoch, in the 1950s. Crawford Lake’s sediment—containing radioactive plutonium and coal ash—offers an “exquisite record” of humanity’s impact on the Earth, they said. Geologists debate whether to call time on the current Holocene period, which began 11,700 years ago.

Members of the UN Security Council failed to re-authorise cross-border aid deliveries from Turkey into opposition-controlled areas of north-west Syria. Russia vetoed extending the humanitarian operation, first authorised in 2014, by nine months; instead it proposed an additional six and sanctions relief for the Syrian regime, which America, Britain and France rejected. Russia was acting like “a bully in the playground”, said America’s ambassador.

The European Court of Human Rights ruled that Caster Semenya, a double 800m Olympic champion, was discriminated against by Switzerland’s supreme court when it upheld World Athletics’ rules on testosterone levels. The South African runner has been barred from the 800m since 2018, when she first challenged regulations that would have required her to take hormone-suppressing drugs. The ECHR’s verdict does not allow her to resume competing.

 

 

Figure of the day:
0.78. The fertility rate in South Korea, which is the lowest in the world. Read the full story here.

 

 

imgPHOTO: GETTY IMAGES

Monsoons bring inflation back to India
This year has mostly been smooth sailing for India’s central bank. Since January the country’s annual inflation rate has fallen steadily. It dropped to 4.3% in May, the lowest level in nearly two years. The decline allowed the Reserve Bank of India to pause its monetary-tightening cycle in April and even triggered speculation of a possible interest-rate cut. All such thoughts have now been squashed. Data released on Wednesday will probably reveal that inflation increased to 4.6% in June, largely because of rising food prices.

And things could be about to get much worse. Record-breaking monsoon rains have recently submerged farms across India, disrupting production. The price of tomatoes, for instance, surged 160% month-on-month last week. Should the deluge continue, annual inflation in July could exceed the central bank’s upper limit of 6%. The RBI may have to wade back in to keep inflation down.

 

 

imgPHOTO: GETTY IMAGES

Congress considers an ungainly defence bill
Every year Congress must authorise a spending bill to pay for America’s defence: it specifies the Pentagon’s budget, stipulates pay rises for service members and funds particular programmes or hardware. And every year, since 1961, the bill has passed.

It will probably do so this year, too, but not without rows. During the protracted contest to elect Kevin McCarthy as the speaker of the House of Representatives, conservative Freedom Caucus members demanded that he not put forward unwieldy “Christmas-tree bills” on which many amendments are hung. Yet lawmakers have tacked more than 1,500 on to the defence bill, and the most peripheral ones come from right-wing Republicans. They would bar the Pentagon from paying for abortions, for example, and funding diversity initiatives.

The House could start voting as early as Wednesday. Mr McCarthy is still trying to appease the right of his party, so expect yet more changes to the bill. But more culture-war amendments means fewer Democrat votes. With a slim majority, Republicans will need to be unified in their support—a frequent challenge for the party of late.

 

 

imgPHOTO: GETTY IMAGES

Myanmar is ablaze as its war churns on
As Myanmar’s civil war spreads, the Burmese army may be using a new tool to crack down on insurgents: fire. Since a military coup in February 2021, which toppled the civilian government led by Aung San Suu Kyi, an increasingly bloody conflict has killed thousands, and driven even more people from their homes. The army, failing to snuff out resistance, has committed widespread atrocities. Satellite imagery suggests it may also now be resorting to literal scorched-earth tactics.

According to data mapped out by the Centre for Information Resilience, an open source, human-rights monitoring group, the number of fires reported across Myanmar increased dramatically last year. The CIR suggests that this could be due to the army and its militias lighting blazes as a way to sow terror. Scores of homes, places of worship and food supplies have been destroyed, particularly in the northern Sagaing region, where indiscriminate airstrikes and other brutal methods of suppression have also been documented.

img

 

 

imgPHOTO: GETTY IMAGES

Will Europe vote to restore nature?
On Wednesday, lawmakers will vote on whether to save the European Union’s Nature Restoration Law, put forward by the European Commission in June 2022. It seeks to restore, by 2030, 20% of the 81% of Europe’s marine and land areas that are said to have been degraded by human activity. If adopted, it would be the bloc’s first legally binding conservation target introduced since it was established 30 years ago.

Parliamentarians are deeply divided, however. The centre-right European People’s Party and agricultural lobbyists argue that the law will harm food production and the livelihoods of farmers and fishermen. The chair of the Environment Committe of the Commission, and several groups of scientists, accuse the EPP of scaremongering and political game-playing ahead of upcoming elections.

Much rides on whether Ursula von der Leyen—as both president of the Commission and a member of the EPP—can corral members of her party. Should the law prevail, states would have two years to submit conservation plans. Its failure, meanwhile, would bode ill for the broader package of environmental proposals that make up the EU’s Green Deal.

 

 

imgPHOTO: DIRK LINDNER/ART FUND

Celebrating culture as the cost of living crunches
On Wednesday, Art Fund, Britain’s national arts charity, will hand out its “Museum of the Year” award. The shortlist includes big attractions like the Natural History Museum in London, as well as less well-known ones—including a museum on the 400-person island of Orkney, off Scotland’s coast, that is dedicated to the world wars. Other contenders include the Burrell Collection in Glasgow, a millennia-spanning 9,000-object trove of treasures from the fine and decorative arts; Leighton House in London, dedicated to a Victorian artist; and the MAC in Belfast, a centre for contemporary arts.

The victor will pocket £120,000 ($155,000): a handy lifeline for institutions facing a tough economic climate. The number of cultural institutions in Britain has more than tripled since the 1960s. But in 2016, growth halted and closures increased, says Mapping Museums, a data research project. Now, the cost-of-living crisis and dwindling government funding for the arts is making it even tougher for museums to survive.

 

 

img

Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Columbia and Cornell universities can be found in which US state?

Tuesday: What is the nickname for the large, slightly convex, eyewear worn by Tom Cruise in “Top Gun”?

Monday: Which US sitcom, which aired in the late 1970s and early 1980s, starred Danny DeVito, Judd Hirsch and Andy Kaufman?

 

 

Quote of the Day
In the country of the blind the one eyed man is king.

Desiderius Erasmus