The world in brief
March 24, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Shou Zi Chew, TikTok’s boss, testified before a committee of America’s House of Representatives. Lawmakers from both parties shared concerns that the app, which is owned by ByteDance, a Chinese company, could be used as a tool of surveillance and propaganda by the Chinese government. Mr Chew’s plan to safely store Americans’ data was met with pronounced scepticism.

The Bank of England raised interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point, to 4.25%, despite recent turmoil in the banking sector. Britain’s higher-than-expected inflation data for February, released on Wednesday, meant that the decision was not unexpected. America’s Federal Reserve increased its rate by the same margin on Wednesday.

Oleksandr Syrsky, Ukraine’s second most senior soldier, said that a counter-attack against Russian forces in Bakhmut would launch “very soon” as enemy soldiers have grown “exhausted”. The battle for the eastern Ukrainian town has become talismanic in recent months. Meanwhile, Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, visited the southern region of Kherson, which is partly occupied by Russian forces.

The share price of Block, a digital-payments firm formerly known as Square, plunged by 15% after Hindenburg Research alleged that it facilitates fraud and inflates its user numbers. The short-seller, which took on the Adani Group in January, claimed that Block’s Cash App is rife with duplicate accounts operated by scammers. Block called the allegations “factually inaccurate”.

Protests in France against President Emmanual Macron’s controversial pension reforms turned violent, with more than 120 police injuries and 172 arrests reported. Tear gas and water cannons were deployed on protesters in cities such as Nantes and Rennes. More than one million people demonstrated across the country, and unions called for new protests and strikes next week.

World Athletics, the governing body for track and field sports, barred transgender women athletes from competing in female categories at events that determine world rankings. There are reportedly no current transgender athletes affected by that ruling. But a move to lower the permissible level of testosterone in intersex athletes could exclude Caster Semenya, a South African runner, and 12 others from competition.

Andy Byford, the public-transport manager who earned the affectionate moniker “Train Daddy” when he ran New York City’s subway system from 2018-2020, will oversee Amtrak’s high-speed rail programme. Mr Byford, a British citizen, resigned as London’s Transport Commissioner in September. His tenure in New York earned plaudits; hopes will be high that he can finally deliver high-speed rail to America.

Fact of the day: 3.2bn, the number of people who played video games in 2022. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China and the Philippines discuss the South China Sea
On Friday Filipino and Chinese officials will continue talks in Manila, the Philippine capital, with the aim of cooling tensions in the South China Sea, where the countries have overlapping claims. The threat of conflict is palpable: a recent skirmish, for instance, saw Chinese coastguards point a laser rangefinder at their Filipino counterparts, causing temporary blindness among some of the crew.

Since the last such talks, held in 2021, the Philippines and America have strengthened their alliance, which binds each to defend the other in the event of armed attack. In a wider conflict, the Philippines would be a strategic base from which American forces could defend Taiwan should Chinese forces attack the self-governing island. The Philippines hopes that their alliance will make China wary of starting a proper fight over the disputed waters—at least until Chinese generals feel confident about winning a bigger conflict.


PHOTO: AP
Biden in Canada
The convention for a new American president to make Canada their first foreign visit has broken in recent years. Donald Trump went to the Middle East first. And covid-19 meant that Joe Biden’s first meeting in office with Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, was a virtual one. Now Mr Biden has finally made it to Ottawa, Canada’s capital, for a two day jaunt. On Friday he addresses the country’s Parliament.

The leaders mostly see eye-to-eye. But migration is one area where they differ. Canada wants to send back asylum seekers who make unofficial border crossings from America, which numbered around 40,000 last year. Meanwhile, America wants Canadian help in dealing with migrants illegally crossing its southern border with Mexico. Many of those migrants are from Haiti, where Mr Biden believes Canada should lead an armed force to help restore order. Mr Trudeau says that “outside intervention” will not achieve that goal. Still, expect the leaders to trumpet their collaboration. In today’s world, allies are not to be taken for granted.


PHOTO: DPA
Taking the pulse of Europe’s economy
Like other monetary policymakers, Europe’s central bankers are having to consider several factors all at once. Headline inflation is coming down, but core inflation—consumer prices without energy and food—is still rising. And, while it remains unclear how turmoil in the American and Swiss banking systems will spill over into the euro zone, the disruption shows how high interest rates can endanger financial stability. Meanwhile, central bankers also want to encourage economic growth amid the uncertainty.

On Friday the euro zone’s Purchasing Manager Index, a survey of confidence in the services and manufacturing sectors, will provide an insight into the state of the bloc’s economy. For now, it looks robust. On Wednesday the German Council of Economic Experts, a government advisory group, upgraded its forecast for the euro area’s biggest economy. It now predicts no recession this year. But it says that GDP growth will be a meagre 0.2%—central banks may be dealing with a weak economy soon enough.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A happiness summit by Lake Como
Spring has finally arrived in the northern hemisphere (the vernal equinox, which marks the season’s start, passed on Monday). What better moment to think about happiness? Over the next three days, in the joyful surroundings of Lake Como in northern Italy, participants at the fifth World Happiness Summit will be doing just that. Karen Guggenheim, the event’s founder, promises “three transformative days” filled with lessons on creating “positive mindsets”.

The realisation that affluence does not necessarily correlate to happiness has led to a growing scholarly interest in what does. Speakers at the summit include intellectual heavyweights like Daniel Kahneman, a Nobel prize-winning behavioural economist, and Richard Layard, who founded the Centre for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics. Moreover, cheerfulness is serious business. The organisers are promoting a course on “Elements of Wellbeing” for the princely sum of $2,599. Perhaps you can put a price on happiness, after all.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Vatican returns its Parthenon marbles
On Friday the Acropolis Museum in Athens will celebrate the return to Greece’s capital of three fragments of marble sculpture, originally from the Parthenon temple. The objects—heads of a boy, a horse and a man (or possibly a centaur)—are around 2,500 years old and were acquired by the Vatican in the early 19th century. Since then they have been housed in the collections of the Vatican museums.

Pope Francis decided to hand back the pieces to Archbishop Ieronymos II, head of the Greek Orthodox Church, to underline his personal commitment to unity between Christian denominations. The move may have wider consequences, too. It adds pressure on Greek authorities and the British Museum in London to reach a deal on returning parts of a 160-metre frieze and other sculptures removed from the Parthenon by Lord Elgin, a British diplomat, in the early 19th century. In January the museum said that talks about returning some of the pieces are ongoing.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Friday: In “Henry IV”, what is the nickname of the character Henry Percy?

Thursday: Which alternative name for England stems from the Latin word for “white”?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya
Joseph Dabramo, Toronto, Canada
Christine Reiter, Tunis, Tunisia

They all gave the correct answers of bureaucrat, Biden, Asia and Texas. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

In consequence of inventing machines, men will be devoured by them.

Jules Verne
