The world in brief
July 25, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Protests erupted across Israel after the parliament approved a divisive law that would curtail the Supreme Court’s powers to nullify “unreasonable” government decisions. Yariv Levin, the country’s justice minister, called it the “first step” in “correcting the judicial system”. Opposition lawmakers boycotted the vote. A leading business forum, made up of around 150 of Israel’s largest companies, went on strike on Monday.

Russian drones destroyed grain storage warehouses on the Danube in Ukraine, a vital export route. The Danube ports are close to Romania, a NATO member. Since it withdrew from the deal that allowed Ukraine to export grain from its Black Sea ports, Russia has targeted the country’s port infrastructure. Earlier Russia accused Ukraine of launching a “terrorist attack” after a drone strike damaged at least two buildings in Moscow.

The Bank of England’s Prudential Regulation Authority and America’s Federal Reserve fined UBS, a Swiss bank, a combined total of $388m for the misconduct of Credit Suisse, which it acquired in June. The Fed said that Credit Suisse failed to “adequately manage” risk posed by Archegos, a family-run investment vehicle. The collapse of the firm in 2021 cost Credit Suisse $5.5bn.

America imposed sanctions against three Malian officials, including the country’s defence minister, for supporting the Wagner Group. According to America’s Treasury department, Colonel Sadio Camara “planned and organised” Wagner’s deployment in the West African country, which reportedly began in December 2021. Wagner mercenaries, alongside Mali’s army, have been accused of massacring civilians and committing other human-rights abuses.

North Korea fired at least one ballistic missile into the sea off its east coast after an American submarine arrived in South Korea. Separately, the UN Command confirmed that it had begun talks with North Korea about the American soldier who entered the country last week. “None of us know where this is going to end”, said the UN commander.

Business activity in Germany fell to its lowest level this year, with a score of 48.3 (above 50 represents growth) in the S&P Global flash composite purchasing managers’ index. German manufacturing slowed to pandemic levels and service growth dipped for the second month. France’s private-sector economy also shrank, with its PMI reading falling to 46.6.

Elon Musk unveiled Twitter’s new logo, “X”. Tweets, he says, will now be called “X’s”. Linda Yaccarino, the company’s boss, posted a picture of the new minimalist logo projected onto the company’s headquarters. On Sunday Mr Musk had announced his intention to remove “all the birds” from the platform.

Figure of the day: 36%, the proportion of Americans that have “quite a lot” of confidence in higher education. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The IMF’s predictions for the world economy
When the International Monetary Fund last updated its economic forecasts, in April, America was going through a banking crisis and global inflation looked stubbornly persistent. It warned of a “rocky recovery” ahead. The fund may adopt a brighter tone in an update on Tuesday. No American bank has failed since May, financial markets are booming and inflation, though still high, has come down faster than expected.

Still, the world economy is slowing as monetary tightening bites. The Federal Reserve and European Central Bank are expected to raise interest rates again on July 26th and July 27th, respectively. Many economists fear the last mile of disinflation will be the hardest, in which unemployment will have to rise noticeably for central banks to bring annual prices all the way down to their 2% targets. And not all the recent news has been good. China’s economy has greatly underperformed amid expectations that it would boom this year.


PHOTO: DPA
Germany’s economy lags behind
In 1999, The Economist described Germany’s economy as “the sick man of Europe”. Harsh, yes. But Germany soon got its act together. After a couple of years of reforms, the economy recovered and 15 golden years followed with record employment and decent growth.

But now the country is once again among the laggards: few countries in Europe are growing more slowly than the continent’s largest economy. The outlook is bleak. The release on Tuesday of the IFO index, a widely watched indicator of Germany’s economic health, for July, will provide a snapshot of where the country is going.

The release on Monday of the purchasing managers’ index, a similar data point to the IFO index, does not bode well. It showed a continued and steeper-than-expected fall in manufacturing. In March Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor, had predicted “a phase of high growth” for the economy. He has not been saying that for a while now.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Legal woes boost Trump’s campaign purse
On Tuesday Donald Trump jets off to Louisiana to court donors. Tickets to his private fundraiser, hosted by the state’s two most prominent Republican financiers, are going for over $23,000. Though state polling is sparse this far out from next year’s election, it is clear that Louisianans have an affinity with the former president. In both 2016 and 2020 he trounced his Democratic opponent there by roughly a 20-point margin.

The fundraiser comes as Mr Trump may soon face another criminal indictment, this time for inciting violence during the Capitol riot on January 6th 2021. For most politicians that would be bad news, but for Mr Trump it will probably be a money-maker. Records from the Federal Election Commission show that donations to his campaign surged in April when he was indicted and arraigned for allegedly burying a hush-money scheme during his campaign in 2016. They rose again in June when he was charged for mishandling classified White House documents. At least when it comes to donors, it seems no publicity is bad publicity for Mr Trump.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Tech investors look for parting clouds
Microsoft and Alphabet, Google’s parent company, report their quarterly results on Tuesday. Revenue growth has slowed at both firms in the past year. The prospect of a global recession has hurt both Google’s advertising sales and Microsoft’s enterprise-software business.

Yet their valuations have nonetheless been buoyed by the hype around ChatGPT-ish artificial intelligence. Alphabet’s share price is up by 37% so far this year; Microsoft’s has jumped by 43%—outpacing the 19% rally of the broader S&P 500 index of leading American shares. Both firms are hoping to boost sales by infusing the technology into their products, such as Google Search or Microsoft Word. They also sell access to AI tools through their cloud-computing arms.

In April Microsoft said that it expected AI to boost revenue growth in its cloud business by one percentage point this quarter. That may sound small, but investors rallied. They will be eager for more good news today.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Deep-sea mining gets anchored
The International Seabed Authority, an appendage of the UN that governs the ocean floors, concludes a month-long sitting with a session in Kingston, Jamaica this week. It will go down as one of the most controversial in its history. At stake are hundreds of millions of tonnes of metal needed for renewable-power generation that are on the floor of the Clarion-Clipperton Zone, in the Pacific Ocean.

For two years the tiny island nation of Nauru has wanted to mine a section of the area. The body failed to finish rules on the commercial use of deposits earlier this month, meaning it must now consider any application that Nauru files, even in the absence of regulations. Some member countries, notably Costa Rica and Chile, are threatening to block this pre-regulation approval, though doing so would be against UN rules. Most delegates will leave disappointed: adopting regulations, which would allow commercial mining to move ahead for all, must now wait for next year’s session.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which 1979 Pink Floyd album is about a rock star suffering from alienation?

Monday: Which author produced the gothic series of novels called “The Vampire Chronicles”?

Common sense in an uncommon degree is what the world calls wisdom.

Samuel Taylor Coleridge
