The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (22:31 GMT+1 / 05:31 Hong Kong)

The head of the UN’s nuclear watchdog left the Zaporizhia nuclear plant in Russian-occupied territory in southern Ukraine. Five inspectors will remain at the facility for several more days. The UN aims to set up a permanent monitor at the power station, which has been the site of intense shelling in recent weeks. Ukraine hopes the inspection will lead to the “demilitarising” of the plant but Russia says it will not withdraw its forces.

Russia’s President Vladimir Putin will not attend the funeral of Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet Union’s last leader, who died on Tuesday. A Kremlin spokesman blamed Mr Putin’s work schedule but said the government was involved in organising Saturday’s ceremony. Mr Gorbachev presided over the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, something Mr Putin has described as the “greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the 20th century”.

Russia said it would stop selling oil to countries that impose a price cap on its oil exports. On Friday the G7 is expected to back a proposal to cap the price of Russian oil, preventing firms from financing or insuring Russian shipments if the sale price exceeds the cap. America suggested the idea out of concern that a total insurance ban, which Britain and the European Union intend to implement in December, would send prices rocketing.

The chairman of Lukoil, Russia’s second-largest oil producer, fell to his death from a hospital window in Moscow. A law-enforcement official said Ravil Maganov committed suicide, though several of his associates told Reuters that it was unlikely he took his own life. It is at least the third reported suicide of an executive with ties to Russia’s oil industry since February.

Clashes between Shia militants in Basra, Iraq, left four people dead, according to local security officials, the latest in a spate of recent violence in the country. Supporters of Muqtada al-Sadr, an influential Shia cleric, have been fighting with rival factions. Iraq has been in political deadlock since Mr Sadr’s party won the most seats in elections last year, but could not form a government.

Chinese officials support a proposal for people to quarantine in Hong Kong before crossing to the mainland, according to John Lee, Hong Kong’s leader. Mr Lee said a task force will work out the details of the “reverse quarantine” system. Meanwhile, some 21m people will be confined to their homes in Chengdu, a city in central China, after it imposed a lockdown on Thursday. It is the largest city-wide lockdown in China since Shanghai’s in April. All businesses will shut except for hospitals, pharmacies and supermarkets.

Poland will demand reparations from Germany for an estimated $1.32trn of losses caused during world war two, said the leader of the country’s ruling party. The figure published in a long-awaited report tops an earlier estimate of $850bn in 2019. Some 6m Poles, 3m of whom were Jewish, were killed during the war and Warsaw, the capital, was razed. Germany has argued that it has resolved all financial claims related to its invasion.

Fact of the day: 16m, the amount of hectares of America covered by lawns, enough to carpet both New York state and New Hampshire. Read the full story.

Iraq’s violent political deadlock

PHOTO: DPA
Include me in your government, or face an intra-Shia civil war. That seems to be the message of Muqtada al-Sadr, an influential cleric, whose supporters have been clashing this week with rival Shia factions in the administrative district of Baghdad, the capital, and beyond. At stake is who heads the government. For now parties allied with Iran and their many militias dominate parliament and hold a veto over the formation of a new administration. The judiciary appears to have their back, too. That is blocking the ambitions of Mr Sadr’s nationalist movement, which emerged as the biggest bloc from last year’s election but which has withdrawn its MPs.

Although Baghdad has calmed, fighting continues in Basra, Iraq’s second city and gateway for the country’s oil supply. And Mr Sadr could yet mobilise his forces should he be excluded from the process of forming a government. Millions of angry and dispossessed Iraqis would heed his call to rise up against Baghdad’s oil-rich elite.

Germany’s trade figures fail to lift the gloom

PHOTO: DPA
Destatis, Germany’s statistics agency, will publish its trade figures for July on Friday. In May the country recorded only a small surplus of €800m ($795m). Exports recovered in June, thanks to increased demand from America and China, and Germany notched up a (seasonally adjusted) surplus of €6.4bn. But the mood among exporters is still gloomy. Sky-high energy prices, supply-chain bottlenecks and the rising cost of raw materials are all worries. The Ifo Institute, a German think-tank, produces an index of exporter expectations; it fell for the third consecutive month in August.

For some companies the cost of production has become so burdensome that they are forced to reject or cancel orders, according to a recent survey by FTI-Andersch, a consultantancy. Firms are reluctant to pass on increased costs to customers. And with energy prices and other production costs still high, the winter months are likely to be tougher still.

Hiring in America

PHOTO: REUTERS
America’s labour market is “clearly out of balance”, groused Jerome Powell, chair of the Federal Reserve, last week. Demand for workers has outstripped supply, pushing up private-sector wages by more than 5% year on year. Yet while the Fed’s interest-rate rises have tightened financial conditions elsewhere—share and property prices are down, the dollar is stronger—the jobs market has remained red-hot. To policymakers’ relief, data released on Friday will probably show that hiring slowed in August. Forecasters reckon employers added 300,000 jobs last month, compared with 528,000 in July.

Labour-market conditions are likely to determine whether the Fed increases rates by half or three-quarters of a percentage point in September. Its task is a balancing act: raise rates high and fast enough to temper jobs and wage growth, without triggering mass lay-offs and tipping the economy into recession. The weaker the jobs data, the softer the landing should be.


Gadgets galore, and you can even touch them

PHOTO: REUTERS
The Internationale Funkausstellung, otherwise known as the IFA, opens its doors in Berlin on Friday. Europe’s biggest annual technology show is being held in person for the first time since the start of the pandemic. It is mainly a platform for manufacturers to show off the latest in consumer electronics.

Thus, with the football World Cup looming in November, ever-higher resolution televisions will be much in evidence. LG is due to unveil the largest ever OLED TV screen, at a whopping 97 inches. Other gadgets are likely to include a “smart” toilet developed by Samsung, which neutralises human waste, as well as shoe cases that do the same for the odour of smelly feet. There will be new smartphones too, but not the 14th iteration of the iPhone. Apple shuns such trade shows. It will launch the device at its own event, on September 7th in Silicon Valley.

Lord of the Dollars

PHOTO: AMAZON STUDIOS
Streaming companies deploy several strategies to drum up interest. One is to throw lots of money at new projects. Another is to talk about how much money is being thrown. Enter “The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power”, a television series released on Amazon Prime in most countries on Friday. Reportedly the most expensive series ever made, the first season alone has a rumoured price tag of $465m.

Despite Amazon’s seemingly bottomless coffers, the tech company’s streaming service has repeatedly disappointed. “The Lord of the Rings” is pure spectacle, featuring an ensemble of elves, humans and hobbits exploring sweeping vistas. But the show also risks losing itself in its expensive theatrics. For the series to achieve Amazon’s dream of winning a “giant, global audience”, it will have to make viewers care about the characters. After all, the idea behind the success of the original is simple: the power of ordinary people to confront evil.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Mediaeval alchemists tried to turn metals such as lead into which valuable substance?

Thursday: The annual general meeting of Berkshire Hathaway, Warren Buffett’s company, is held in which US city?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Anand Mahajan, Mumbai, India

North America: Rachel Zweig, Fayetteville, America

Central and South America: Jaime Jean, Mexico City, Mexico

Europe: David Powles, Paris, France

Africa: Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya

Oceania: Wendy Pearce, Perth, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of gene therapy, Goethe, haven and yellow. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

When we are no longer able to change a situation, we are challenged to change ourselves.

Viktor Frankl
