The world in brief
August 5, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A Ukrainian drone attack on a naval base near Novorossiysk, a port on Russia’s Black Sea coast, reportedly damaged a Russian warship. The Kremlin said its forces had destroyed the drones, but video on social media showed a listing warship being towed to port. Clashes in the Black Sea have increased since Russia withdrew from a deal allowing the export of grain from Ukrainian ports.

America added 187,000 jobs in July, a figure slightly lower than many analysts had predicted. Job growth in the previous two months was also revised down. But unemployment fell to 3.5% from 3.6% in June. Meanwhile, wages rose by an annual rate of 4.4%. The figures suggest that the job market is cooling, but not crashing.

India’s Supreme Court suspended Rahul Gandhi’s conviction for defamation. Mr Gandhi—who leads the Congress, the main opposition party—was sentenced to two years in prison and disqualified from parliament for making a remark about people named Modi, such as India’s prime minister Narendra Modi, in 2019. The ruling may mean Mr Gandhi can retake his parliamentary seat and participate in national elections next year.

Shares in Apple fell after the tech giant reported a drop in revenues in the second quarter. Sales of iPhones, which account for nearly half of all revenues, fell by 2.4% year on year. Net profit, however, increased by 2.3%. The shift highlights Apple’s growing focus on digital services. The number of subscribers to services such as iCloud has risen by 150m over the past 12 months.

Donald Trump pleaded not guilty to four charges related to his efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election, including conspiracy to defraud America. The former president and 2024 Republican primary front-runner was arraigned in a federal courtroom in Washington, DC. It was his third arraignment in four months; in the two others Mr Trump also delivered not-guilty pleas.

Chinese dealmaking in America was worth just $221m since the beginning of 2023, the lowest figure in 17 years. Tensions between the two countries, including a trade war around semiconductors, have dampened appetite for mergers and acquisitions in America among Chinese businesses. Chinese outbound mergers and acquisitions fell from a high point of $212bn in 2016 to $54bn in 2019.

Two American Navy sailors were arrested for sharing sensitive military information with China. According to prosecutors in California, the men received thousands of dollars to reveal details about defence equipment and operations. A senior FBI official criticised China’s espionage efforts, saying it would “stop at nothing to attack” America.

Figure of the day: $91bn, the foreign direct investment Brazil received last year, making it the fifth-largest investment destination in the world. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America’s loosening labour market
Perhaps the biggest economic story of the year has been America’s immaculate disinflation: price pressures have diminished even as the economy has remained robust. A crucial reason has been the gradual softening of the labour market. Job growth has slowed a bit and wage increases have been smaller. Data released on Friday show that these trends basically continued in July.

America added about 187,000 jobs last month, a bit weaker than many analysts had forecast. Job growth in the previous two months was also revised lower. Wage increases remained a little hot for comfort, rising at an annual pace of 4.4%, too high to be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s goal of 2% inflation. Nevertheless, looked at in the round, the figures suggest that the job market and the wider economy is cooling, not crashing. That helps to support the hopes of a soft landing for America.


PHOTO: AP
Navalny given another 19 years in prison
On Friday Alexei Navalny, Russia’s most prominent dissident, was sentenced to a further 19 years in prison. Mr Navalny was convicted on spurious charges of extremism. The court found him guilty of “rehabilitating Nazism” and ruled that the Anti-Corruption Foundation, his NGO, incited criminal activities. The case was heard at a penal colony some 250km (150 miles) east of Moscow, where the dissident was already imprisoned on a sentence of 11 and a half years, having previously been convicted of parole violation, fraud and contempt of court.

The additional sentence largely matched the expectations of Mr Navalny’s supporters, who said before the verdict that prosecutors were hoping to add 20 years. In truth, the number is academic: allies understand that Mr Navalny will be in prison for as long as Vladimir Putin remains Russia’s president.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Green shipping’s buoyant future
On Friday Maersk, the world’s second-largest container-shipping group, reported its second-quarter earnings. Gross operating profits fell 72% compared with the same quarter a year before, from a record $10.3bn to $2.9bn, as a pandemic-driven boom in freight comes to an end. Analysts had expected an even larger drop, to $2.4bn.

The short-term slump hides a promising trend. In June Maersk ordered six vessels with engines able to run on “green” methanol, a chemical that could help cut shipping’s carbon emissions—worth 3% of the global total. In total, the firm has now ordered 25 such ships, and the global order book stands at more than 100.

Unlike other green fuels such as ammonia or hydrogen, methanol can be stored at room temperature, and engines running on it already exist. It will not replace bunker oil, guzzled by ships for the last century, until lots more refuelling terminals and fuel-production capacity are built. But at least the green shipping business has been launched.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Rahul Gandhi’s conviction is suspended
On Friday India’s Supreme Court put a stay on the conviction for defamation of Rahul Gandhi, the leader of Congress, the biggest opposition party. In March the politician was sentenced to two years in prison and disqualified from parliament. Mr Gandhi, who has been out on bail as he appealed the conviction, has always maintained the case was politically motivated.

During a campaign speech in 2019 Mr Gandhi made a remark about people named Modi, the surname of India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi. Purnesh Modi, a lawmaker in Gujarat, the prime minister’s home state, who is a member of India’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, claimed that Mr Gandhi’s remark defamed him and his community. A state court agreed and two other courts rejected earlier appeals against the conviction, meaning Mr Gandhi has been unable to participate in the monsoon session of parliament, which began in July. The ruling may allow him to return to parliament and take part in next year’s general elections.


PHOTO: DENIS O’REGAN / SOTHEBY'S
Freddie Mercury’s belongings at auction
“I like to be surrounded by splendid things,” Freddie Mercury once said, “by exquisite clutter”. He filled Garden Lodge—his home in Kensington, London—with a panoply of items: bespoke furniture; delicate glass vases; kimonos and decorative objects from Japan; artworks by Chagall, Matisse and Picasso; and, of course, colourful costumes he performed in with Queen.

After Mercury’s death in 1991, Garden Lodge went to Mary Austin, his friend and former lover. In April she announced that, bar some “personal gifts”, she would be selling the lot—more than 1,400 items in total. From Friday, they are available to view at Sotheby’s in London ahead of a spate of auctions in August and September. Mercury’s collection includes several mementoes from rock history. A working draft of the lyrics to “Bohemian Rhapsody” could fetch up to £1.2m ($1.5m.) The baby grand piano on which he wrote many of Queen’s most famous songs is valued at £2m-3m.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: What was the nickname of the 19th century businessman, Cornelius Vanderbilt?

Thursday: What was the name of the “paranoid android” in “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy” series?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

William Meldrum, Melbourne, Australia
Sunil Chhabra, Mississauga, Canada
Nirmalendu Jajodia, Mumbai, India

They all gave the correct answers of Nigel Farage, Nvidia, flour and empire. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

I can’t die. It would ruin my image.

Jack LaLanne
