The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 2 hours ago (05:04 GMT+1 London)

China’s premier, Li Keqiang, said the country’s economy could contract during the current quarter, and that its situation was “in some ways” worse than in 2020, when the whole world was starting to reel from covid-19. China’s growth target of 5.5% in 2022 now looks a long way off, he admitted; rising unemployment is a particular difficulty. Hundreds of millions of Chinese have been placed under some form of lockdown this year, as the government attempts to eradicate the ineradicable coronavirus.

Ukraine denied that Russian troops had taken control of an important road into the city of Severodonetsk, where Ukrainian soldiers are holding out under a fierce assault. The fall of Severodonetsk and neighbouring Lysychansk would mean Russia taking control of the whole Luhansk region, one of the Kremlin’s chief aims. Ukraine’s defence ministry said that Russia is shelling more than 40 towns in Donbas, the eastern territory of which Luhansk forms half.

​​The 18-year-old who fired upon children in Uvalde, Texas, shared his plans to attack a school on Facebook shortly before the massacre he wrought on Tuesday, officials said. Meta, Facebook’s parent company, said the posts were private one-to-one messages. Salvador Ramos shot his grandmother—who survived—at home before gunning down 19 children and two adults at the elementary school.

Officials at America’s Federal Reserve mulled raising interest rates high enough to slow growth, in order to curb inflation, according to minutes from a meeting earlier this month. But a majority of the central bankers decided it would be better to raise rates by just half a percentage point, at each of their next two meetings. However, they think that “a restrictive stance of policy may well become appropriate” in future.

Elon Musk committed to providing an additional $6.25bn in equity financing to fund his purchase of Twitter, according to filings from America’s Securities and Exchange Commission. The deal has stalled since the company’s board accepted Mr Musk’s $44bn offer last month. At their annual shareholder meeting on Wednesday, Twitter executives declined to comment on the takeover.

Violent clashes broke out across Pakistan after Imran Khan, the prime minister until he was ousted in April, led supporters on a march into the capital, Islamabad, calling for fresh elections. The Supreme Court ruled that their rally must be allowed. Police deployed tear-gas and batons along its route, and arrested at least 1,000 protesters.

America’s Securities and Exchange Commission published a proposal to require “ESG” funds to make good on their often vague promises to support environmental, social and corporate governance goals. The SEC may look intrepid, wading into such amorphous territory. But its goals are clear enough: to squelch bogus marketing and force some kind of standardisation on a booming bit of the investment industry.

Fact of the day: 900, the number of shootings on school grounds in America since the massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School a decade ago. 