The world in brief
May 23, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The EU fined Meta, which owns Facebook and Instagram, €1.2bn ($1.3bn) for failing to comply with its privacy rules and ordered the company to suspend transfers of user data to America. It is the largest fine to be imposed on a big tech company in the bloc. Ireland’s Data Protection Commission, one of the EU’s privacy watchdogs, said that Facebook did not properly protect the data of European users against American surveillance programmes.

Vyacheslav Gladkov, the governor of Russia’s Belgorod region, which borders Ukraine, said that a Ukrainian “sabotage group” had entered Russian territory. In a statement Mr Gladkov said that Russian forces were taking steps to repel the attack. Mykhailo Podolyak, a senior advisor to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, said that Ukraine has “nothing to do” with the events in Belgorod.

Joe Biden’s administration reached a deal with three American states to protect water supplies from the Colorado River. California, Arizona and Nevada agreed to reduce their water intake from the drought-stricken river by about 13%; in return, the federal government will compensate them with roughly $1.2bn. The river is crucial to the south-west, supplying 40m people with water and hydropower.

Sinan Ogan, the third-placed candidate in Turkey’s presidential election, said he would back Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the country’s president, in the run-off on May 28th. Mr Erdogan achieved 49.5% in the first, just short of a majority. Mr Ogan received only 5.2%. His announcement further narrows the chances of the opposition candidate, Kemal Kilcdargolu, of pulling off a historic win.

TikTok sued Montana over the state’s ban on the social-media app, which it called a violation of Americans’ free-speech rights. Montana’s law, due to take effect next year, will fine app stores that enable downloads of the Chinese-owned platform. It is the first such measure in America, enacted over concerns about users’ vulnerability to data collection and propaganda.

China’s vice foreign minister said Japan and the G7 colluded to “smear and attack China” and summoned the Japanese ambassador to Beijing to protest against the “hype around China-related issues”. The Global Times, a state-backed tabloid, called the G7 summit, hosted by Japan, an “anti-China workshop”. On Saturday the G7 condemned China’s “economic coercion” and “militarisation activities” in the South China Sea.

Belarus pardoned Roman Protasevich, a Belarusian journalist and activist, according to state media. In May 2021 Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, forced a Ryanair passenger plane to make an unscheduled stop in his capital in order to arrest Mr Protasevich. He was later sentenced to eight years in prison. In a video the 28-year-old said he was “insanely grateful” to the president for pardoning him.

Fact of the day: 1,788, the number of new TV series ordered by a broadcaster or streaming platform based in Britain in the year to April. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
Ukraine stocks up for its counter-offensive
On Tuesday EU defence ministers will meet in Brussels to discuss the bloc’s support for Ukraine. In recent weeks France, Germany and Italy have all promised more military support, including air-defence systems, howitzers and drones. Meanwhile, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, secured more pledges for weapons at the G7 summit in Japan on Sunday, including a new American package worth $375m. America also said that it would help to train Ukrainian pilots on F-16 fighter jets, an important step towards Ukraine finally getting the warplanes.

The flurry of pledges comes as Ukraine prepares for its long-awaited counter-offensive. Yet analysts at the Royal United Services Institute, a London-based think-tank, suggest that Ukrainian success will probably rely more on sound tactics than new weaponry. They note that Russia’s tactics have evolved substantially, notably in the deployment of infantry. Ukrainian forces will have to be dynamic to gain the initiative, breaking through Russian defences and exploiting gaps.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Modi goes Down Under
After meetings with leaders of G7 and Pacific island countries, Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, continues his diplomatic blitz on Tuesday with a visit to Australia. The relationship between the two countries has always been lacklustre. (According to one bad joke, every Australian government discovers India once.) But there is more now to give it spark, especially the countries’ shared concerns about China. Both sides feel the steely edge of Chinese expansionism—either through economic coercion or territorial clashes. They form one half of the Quad, a strategic grouping whose other members are America and Japan. They have stepped up military training with other Quad partners.

Trade has almost doubled since 2020. Last year Australia and India signed a free-trade agreement to boost it further. Yet perhaps the biggest source of unity is cultural. Indian migration to Australia has soared: Indians now make up its second-biggest ethnic diaspora community after the British. Mr Modi is due to speak at a stadium in Sydney; thousands of Indian-origin Australians will be there to cheer him.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Bosnian Serb leader pays homage to Putin
Milorad Dodik, the president of Republika Srpska, the Serbian entity in Bosnia-Hercegovina, will be in Moscow on Tuesday. He is attending a business meeting of the Eurasian Economic Union, a small Russian-dominated bloc of former Soviet states, and is expected to meet Vladimir Putin.

Mr Dodik favours ties with Russia over those with the EU. He has so far prevented Bosnia from imposing sanctions on Russia. His actions have cost him friends in the West. Mr Dodik is under British and US sanctions for alleged corruption, which he denies, and for threatening regional stability.

None of this jeopardises Bosnia’s EU candidacy, however, because Mr Dodik is now so isolated. He is going to Moscow to to show that he still has one important friend. Mr Dodik and Mr Putin may discuss the building of a separate gas pipeline from Russia to Republika Srpska via Serbia. This would help give the Serbian bit of Bosnia energy independence from the rest of it, making Mr Dodik’s secessionist ambitions more achievable.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Shell’s shareholder strife
On Tuesday Shell, a European oil giant, will hold its annual general meeting in London. Its C-suite and its security operation are probably feeling on edge. Last year’s AGM was disrupted after environmental protestors burst in. Almost a fifth of Shell’s shareholders went on to vote against the board’s proposed strategy for reducing greenhouse-gas emissions, regarding it as inadequate.

This year’s meeting could be more acrimonious still. High energy prices have bestowed on the oil majors an extraordinary glut of cash. In February Shell posted annual net profits for 2022 of $42bn, more than double what it earned in 2021. That delighted some investors. Others are determined to force the company to do more to lessen the damage it has caused to the environment. Follow This, an activist investor group, has filed a resolution demanding that Shell slash greenhouse-gas emissions across its whole supply chain by 2030 by far more than it has promised.


PHOTO: BOOKER PRIZE FOUNDATION
The International Booker Prize
On Tuesday the International Booker Prize for fiction in English translation will be awarded. The £50,000 ($62,300) prize is split equally between author and translator. Leïla Slimani, a French-Moroccan journalist and novelist who chairs the jury, calls the shortlist of six books “very cool, very sexy”.

Their authors include the 89-year-old, Guadeloupe-born doyenne of French fiction, Maryse Condé, and the Korean screenwriter-turned-cult-novelist, Cheon Myeong-kwan. Themes stretch from same-sex parenthood in Reykjavik (“Boulder”, by Eva Baltasar) to divisive nationalism (“Time Shelter”, a satirical work of science fiction by Bulgaria’s Georgi Gospodinov). “Standing Heavy”, by Ivorian author GauZ’, deals with the struggles of France’s migrant underclass.

Ms Condé, the oldest author ever to be shortlisted, would be a popular winner. The visionary Mr Gospodinov would be a topical one. And a win for Mr Cheon’s fantastical family saga, “Whale”, would add another crest to Korea’s cultural wave.


Daily Quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Who directed the films 1917 and Skyfall?

Monday: Which car company, established in 1899, sells models including the Megane and Clio?

Style is not neutral; it gives moral directions.

Martin Amis
