The world in brief
July 14, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A Russian general, Ivan Popov, was dismissed after accusing the military leadership of failing its troops, the latest sign of rising tensions in the army after a mutiny by Wagner mercenaries on June 24th. Mr Popov had criticised the high casualty rate and lack of artillery support on the frontline in the Zaporizhia region. Around 15 senior officers, including General Sergei Surovikin, the head of aerospace forces, were suspended or fired following the Wagner mutiny, according to the Wall Street Journal.

A union representing screen actors in America joined Hollywood writers in their strike, in effect shutting down film and TV productions. Both unions want better “residuals”—payments when content is played after initial release—from streaming services. Film promotion will halt too: stars of “Oppenheimer”, a forthcoming blockbuster, left the London premiere after the strike was announced.

America’s Federal Trade Commission opened an inquiry into OpenAI’s handling of consumer data and security practices. Regulators are reportedly probing whether the startup’s products—principally ChatGPT—harmed consumers’ reputations by publishing false information. Lina Khan, boss of the FTC, said that training artificial intelligence on personal information could be a form of fraud, which falls under her agency’s remit.

Germany published its first-ever strategy for relations with China, its biggest trading partner. The document aims to balance trade ties and co-operation on global challenges such as climate change with “de-risking”, which in practice means diversifying export markets and supply chains. The strategy demonstrates concerns over China’s growing internal repression and external assertiveness, as well as its relationship with Russia.

Chérubin Okende, the spokesman for an opposition party in Congo, was shot dead in Kinshasa, the capital. Mr Okende served as the government’s transport minister until the end of 2022, when his party’s leader broke from the ruling coalition and said he would run for president. Several opposition figures have been arrested in the run-up to the election, due in December.

Thailand’s reformist opposition leader, Pita Limjaroenrat, failed in his first attempt to become prime minister. Mr Pita, who won a general election in May, stood unopposed but was blocked in a parliamentary vote by the senate, which was appointed by a previous Conservative government. Another round of voting is expected on July 19th. Mr Pita promises an anti-establishment agenda, including amendments to Thailand’s strict lese-majeste laws.

Ukraine suffered a particularly heavy wave of Russian drone attacks, with Kyiv under fire for a third consecutive night. One person was killed and four wounded in the capital, according to local authorities. On Thursday the G7, a club of rich democracies, announced “enduring” new security guarantees for Ukraine at a meeting of NATO leaders in Vilnius, Lithuania.

Figure of the day: 34m, the number of Indians at risk of riverine flooding by 2030. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A pugnacious performance in the South China Sea
On Friday, Philippine and American marines start their second and final week of joint exercises, practising fighting off a seaborne attack on the Philippine archipelago. For the sake of diplomacy, the officers commanding the forces (which include 2,700 marines and 43 aircraft) have avoided identifying their supposed attacker. But among the seven surrounding countries that either wholly or partially contest ownership of the South China Sea, only China stands to gain by subduing the Philippines forcibly.

China aims to dominate the South China Sea so it can guard the southern flank of any force it might send to capture Taiwan, a self-governing island China insists is its own. But Chinese military adventures are obstructed, for the present, by a newly strengthened Philippine-American defensive alliance. The marines were supposed to finish their first week of exercises by sinking an old tanker (representing an enemy warship) in a display of firepower. But seasonal rain washed out their target practice—somewhat diminishing the deterrent value.


PHOTO: EPA
Trustbusters and big business remain at odds
On July 11th, a judge in San Francisco ruled that America’s Federal Trade Commission could not pause Microsoft’s blockbuster $69bn acquisition of Activision Blizzard, a game developer. The decision was heard across the ocean. Britain’s Competition and Markets Authority promptly said that it was open to reconsidering the deal, having previously blocked it. The temporary order preventing Microsoft and Activision from moving ahead with the merger expires on Friday. The pair are expected to put forward a new deal structure to tackle concerns, including that Microsoft could corner the nascent subscription and cloud-gaming markets.

Yet losses in court have not fazed the trustbusters. The FTC promptly appealed this week’s decision. And the CMA has made clear that it will review any new proposals relating to the deal. The months and millions are adding up, and could still mount: if Microsoft does not close the deal before July 18th, it may be on the hook to pay Activision a $3bn reverse-termination fee. Dealmakers will think twice before their next big purchases.


PHOTO: EPA
Muted celebrations in France
On Friday France will celebrate its national day with a mix of pageantry and restraint. The pomp will come from the military processions that are the centrepiece of Bastille Day. Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, will be this year’s special guest, bringing troops in tow to add to the parades. His host Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, will no doubt try to woo Mr Modi more firmly to the West’s side, notably when it comes to the war in Ukraine (India now snaps up a lot of Russian oil).

But much of Mr Macron’s attention will be turned to domestic matters. The evening will be unusually quiet: authorities have banned the possession and sale of fireworks in the wake of recent riots sparked by the police killing of a 17-year-old in the suburbs of Paris. Nor will Mr Macron make the president’s traditional public address—preferring to push it back a few days.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Singapore’s recession risk
The first estimate of Singapore’s second-quarter GDP will be released on Friday. A slump in trade, particularly in electronics, is dragging on the economy, raising the risk of a technical recession—two consecutive quarters of falling GDP—after a 0.4% drop in economic output in the first quarter. That is unfamiliar territory for the bustling city-state.

Singapore’s exports dropped by 14.7% year on year in May, led by the tumbling sales abroad of electronics. The post-pandemic slump in sales of gadgets, following the surge in demand from consumers stuck at home during lockdowns, is bad news for an export-orientated economy like Singapore’s. Factory output has languished too, driven by a fall in semiconductor production.

Stronger activity at home may, however, be enough to keep growth figures positive. Analysts at DBS, a Singaporean bank, point to the hospitality sector and the high hotel occupancy rate (driven by returning Chinese tourists) as a boost.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Monsters of rock’s album covers
Anyone who owns a hit rock LP from the 1970s will likely know the work of Hipgnosis, even if they aren’t aware that they do. The album-cover design studio was the best of its era. It created sleeves for Pink Floyd (including the beam of light refracted through a prism for “The Dark Side Of The Moon”), Led Zeppelin, AC/DC and Black Sabbath, to name a few.

“Squaring The Circle (The Story Of Hipgnosis)”, a new documentary, is released in British cinemas and on streaming services on Friday. It tells of how Storm Thorgerson and Aubrey Powell, members of Pink Floyd’s social circle in Cambridge, rose to dominate their field through a mixture of inspiration, opportunism and sheer audacity. Aptly, it is directed by Anton Corbijn, a music video-maker. Album sleeves were to the 1970s what videos were to the 1980s and 1990s—branding that became inextricably linked with the music. Many artists created the sound of rock’s golden age, but it owes its defining visual imagery almost exclusively to Hipgnosis.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: What is the nickname of James Carville, a strategist in Bill Clinton’s 1992 Presidential campaign?

Thursday: What is the statistical term for the arithmetic or geometric average of a group of numbers?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya

Alice Li Hagan, Honololu, America

Grant Mackay, Auckland, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of Silver Bullet, Seabed, Riots and Thames. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

I will have no locked cupboards in my life.

Gertrude Bell
