The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 7 hours ago (21:33 GMT+1 / 04:33 Hong Kong)

Ukraine’s continued counter-offensive in both the east and south has prompted rare public criticisms of senior Russian officials. Kirill Stremousov, the Russian-appointed deputy governor of the annexed province of Kherson, has lashed out at Russia’s “incompetent military leaders” in a video message. Meanwhile, a Russian missile strike on a residential building killed at least three people in Zaporizhia, a Ukrainian-held city.

The EU and Norway agreed to “jointly develop tools” to normalise the energy market and reduce prices. Norway is now the EU’s largest external gas supplier as the bloc reduces its reliance on Russian energy following the invasion of Ukraine. Meanwhile Britain’s national grid will ask households to lower their energy use, warning of potential blackouts this winter.

Annie Ernaux, a French author known for her intensely personal works, won the Nobel prize for literature. The Swedish Academy cited her “courage and clinical acuity with which she uncovers the roots, estrangements and collective restraints of personal memory”.

America said it would redirect inbound travellers from Uganda to five designated airports for Ebola screening starting on Friday. In the past two weeks Uganda has recorded more than 60 confirmed or probable cases of the disease and 29 deaths. Its Ebola outbreak is caused by a strain of the virus for which there is no licensed vaccine—the existing vaccine targets a separate strain.

President Joe Biden pardoned all Americans convicted of simple marijuana possession under federal law, a move affecting more than 6,500 people that fulfils a campaign pledge. He also ordered a review of whether marijuana should remain, for sentencing purposes, in the same class of drugs as heroin and LSD. Recreational marijuana use is legal in 19 states and Washington, DC.

A former police officer killed at least 38 people, including 22 children, in a gun attack at a day-care centre in north-east Thailand, according to police. Reports suggest the gunman, who was armed with a shotgun, pistol and knife, killed himself and his family after the attack. Thailand’s prime minister, Prayut Chan-ocha, called the attack “horrifying”.

Porsche overtook its former parent company, Volkswagen, to become Europe’s most valuable carmaker a week after its initial public offering. Shares in Porsche rose to €93 ($91), giving it a valuation of €85bn compared with Volkswagen’s €78bn, after the banks involved in the company’s IPO bought nearly 3.8m shares.

Fact of the day: 49.7%, the proportion of German companies that cannot secure enough skilled workers, up from 30% in 2019. Read the full story.

Europe’s property slowdown

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
House prices across Britain and the EU have spiralled since the start of the pandemic. But not for much longer, according to two separate indices to be published on Friday by Halifax, a British lender, and Eurostat, the EU’s statistics agency. Higher mortgage rates and a cost-of-living squeeze are dampening buyer enthusiasm. From July to August, according to Halifax, the price of an average British house rose by 0.4%, to a record £294,260 ($342,000). But that increase was slower than the monthly average of 0.9% over the past year.

A meltdown akin to America’s subprime crisis when prices fell by a third looks unlikely: a chronic shortage of homes has seen prices across the EU soar by45% since 2010. Tight labour markets, which improve household finances, mean that homes are still being snapped up. But as the market cools, a reversal could be around the corner.


Will Ohio’s abortion ban survive?

PHOTO: REUTERS
The overturning of Roe v Wade in June has opened up a battleground in the Buckeye state. The removal of federal protections opened the way for Ohio’s “trigger ban”, introduced in 2019, to come into force. It prohibited almost all abortions after six weeks. But in mid-September a judge in Hamilton County temporarily suspended the law, on the grounds that Ohio’s constitution guarantees a “fundamental right to privacy, procreation, bodily integrity and freedom of choice”. His ruling, which lasts until October 12th, was a victory for pro-choice campaigners.

On Friday the court will hold another hearing on the injunction. And specific abortion cases are percolating through the courts. In June a ten-year-old was forced to travel to Indiana from Ohio for an abortion after being raped. Indiana’s Republican attorney-general threatened to prosecute the doctor who performed the abortion, claiming, incorrectly, that she had not filed the correct paperwork; she is now suing him for defamation. The battles over abortion show no sign of losing steam.

Rumbles over independence in Catalonia

PHOTO: EPA
On Friday one of Catalonia’s two governing parties, Junts per Catalunya, will announce the result of an internal vote on whether to leave the government. Both Junts and its coalition partner, Esquerra Republicana (ERC), support Catalonian independence. Both backed the illegal independence referendum of October 2017, which prompted the national government in Madrid to suspend the region’s self-rule. After a bare majority of voters chose pro-independence parties in last year’s regional elections, many separatist politicians took the result as a mandate to press on.

But the partners are divided on speed. The smaller, more conservative Junts are impatient, while the larger ERC has banked on winning concessions from Madrid through a formal dialogue that began last year. A crackup of the coalition risks putting the independence question on ice. ERC will need votes from more mainstream parties to govern; those groups will want to prioritise the economy. Despite their differences, neither party wants new elections.

Little Lesotho makes a big decision

PHOTO: REUTERS
The general election in Lesotho on Friday will be one of the least-watched votes in the world this year. The neglect is understandable: Lesotho is a poor and tiny country of just 2.2m people, entirely encircled by South Africa. Yet a new government could jolt the former British protectorate to turn the page on a tumultuous recent history.

Since independence in 1966 Lesotho has seen coups, attempted coups, prime ministers fleeing the country, assassinations of military bosses, unstable coalition governments and, most recently, a former prime minister accused of conspiring with his third wife to murder his second. (The charges were dropped in July.) Corruption and crime are rampant. Politics is about access to spoils, not the pursuit of the greater good.

The next government will probably be another coalition involving ideologically indistinguishable parties. As pressure from donors and civil society mounts, its priority should be to pass constitutional reforms. That is, if it is not too busy at the trough to bother.

The Beatles and Bond, 60 years on

PHOTO: ALLSTAR
Sixty years ago this week the Beatles released their debut single, “Love Me Do”, and the first James Bond film, “Dr No”, premiered at the London Pavilion. Neither was an instant hit. Liverpool’s finest failed to make Britain’s top ten, whilst Sean Connery’s Bond was roasted by the critics, one calling him “a great big hairy marshmallow”. Things worked out in the end, of course; the 25 official Bond films have made more than $7bn at the box office, and the Beatles retain most of the world records for shifting pop music.

John Higgs explores the seismic, and intertwining, cultural impact of the Beatles and Bond in his new book, “Love and Let Die”. Both heralded a vivid, technicolour break with the buttoned-up wartime generation. Yet, as Mr Higgs writes, alongside the jetset modernity, the Bond films cleaved to attitudes on women and class that were already reactionary, and the Beatles won acclaim with the “faux Victoriana” of “Sgt. Pepper”. Little wonder they were so popular in Britain.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which demon is also known as the “lord of the flies”?

Thursday: Which astronomer was the first to discover Jupiter’s moons?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Sean Stewart, Delhi, India

North America: Dave Hill, Portland, United States

Central and South America: Sebastian Agudelo-Restrepo, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic

Europe: Leonid Chindelevitch, Nailsea, United Kingdom

Africa: Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya

Oceania: Roseanne Hansen, Brisbane, Australia


They all gave the correct answers of Keir Starmer, Korean, taxes and regime. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Resentment and anger are bad for your blood pressure and your digestion.

Desmond Tutu