The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 28, 2023

Rishi Sunak, Britain’s prime minister, and Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, struck a deal on reforming Northern Ireland’s post-Brexit trading arrangements. The new “Windsor framework”, as they dubbed it, allows goods from Britain not bound for the EU to pass through a “green” lane, thereby largely avoiding customs checks. Mr Sunak hailed the agreement as a “new chapter” in his country’s relationship with the EU, and confirmed that Parliament would vote on it in due course.

At least 63 people died when a boat carrying about 150 migrants sank off Italy’s southern coast. More than a dozen children were among the dead. Some 105,000 people tried to claim asylum in Italy in 2022; many cross the Mediterranean Sea in flimsy vessels from north Africa. Italy’s anti-immigration prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, expressed “deep sorrow” for the victims.

Janet Yellen, America’s treasury secretary, arrived in Kyiv in a surprise visit meant to promote the non-military aid provided by her country. Echoing President Biden, Ms Yellen said America would stand by Ukraine for “as long as it takes”. She also announced the distribution of the first $1.25bn of a $9.9bn aid package America has promised the country.

Zoom said quarterly revenues rose by 4% year over year, to $1.1bn. The video-conferencing service recorded a loss of $130m owing to stock-based compensation costs. Once the world’s 65th-most-valuable company, Zoom is worth about the same as it was before the pandemic. The S&P 500 index, meanwhile, leapt by 24% over the same period.

Bola Tinubu, of the ruling All Progressive Congress party, took an early lead in Nigeria’s election. The definitive result is not expected for days; a new electronic-voting system has been slow to release voting tallies. Usually a two-horse race, this year’s competition was energised by Peter Obi, a third-party candidate who unexpectedly won Lagos state.

Ueda Kazuo, the incoming governor of the Bank of Japan, said he had ideas for tweaking the bank’s ultra-loose policies but believed a tighter approach was not yet needed. At the second parliamentary hearing in his confirmation process, Mr Ueda argued that Japan’s long-term inflation rate would have to rise first for policy to change.

NASA and SpaceX, a rocketry firm founded by Elon Musk, halted the launch of a spacecraft minutes before blastoff after discovering a glitch in the machine’s fuel-ignition system. The craft was due to take four astronauts up to the International Space Station. The crew will now remain at the Kennedy Space Centre in Florida until another attempt can be made.

Fact of the day: $1.1trn, the fall in global foreign-exchange reserves between the end of 2020 and the third quarter of 2022. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
Chicago’s election
America’s third-biggest city goes to the polls on Tuesday, with voters choosing from nine candidates for mayor, alongside other city posts. The election is one of the first to test the mayor of a big American city since the end of the coronavirus pandemic. Lori Lightfoot, the incumbent, is struggling. Her chances of reaching the second round (if no candidate gets more than 50%, another election will be held on April 4th) are far from guaranteed.

Most likely to get through is Paul Vallas, a right-wing-leaning former chief executive of the city’s school system, backed by the Fraternal Order of Police, a union. His campaign has focused almost entirely on crime. If not Ms Lightfoot, his probable opponent will be Jesús (Chuy) García, a progressive Mexican-born Congressman, or possibly Brandon Johnson, a charismatic left-winger backed by the teacher’s union. In a city struggling with an identity crisis, that could make for a worryingly divisive contest.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
India’s economy, a global bright spot?
On Tuesday the Indian government releases its GDP data for the last quarter of 2022. Forecasts suggest that growth slipped to 4.6% year on year, from 6.3% in the previous quarter. Inflation and the central bank’s interest-rate increases have hurt consumption, while the global slowdown has hit exports.

But India’s economy remains a “relative bright spot” amid the worldwide economic gloom, according to the IMF. It expects India to be the fastest-growing big economy in the world in 2023, accounting for 15% of global growth. The ruling Bharatiya Janata Party has announced investments in infrastructure that it believes will propel the country into “Amrit Kaal”, an auspicious period that heralds prosperity. Such bullishness, though, is not shared by ordinary Indians. According to a survey by the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy, a research outfit, less than a fifth of households believe their incomes will be higher a year from today.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Student-loan forgiveness at the Supreme Court
Last August President Joe Biden announced that the federal government would forgive up to $10,000 in student-loan debt for borrowers earning less than $125,000 a year and up to $20,000 for the lowest earners. A flurry of lawsuits followed; on Tuesday, two of them reach America’s highest court.

Six states and two former students who owe money argue that the programme (with a price tag of nearly a half-trillion dollars) is an example of executive overreach. Mr Biden’s justification—the economic crisis caused by the pandemic—was merely a “pretext”, they argue, for fulfilling a campaign promise. In fact he has no legal authority to forgive the debt, they claim. Mr Biden defends the move by citing theHEROES Act of 2003, a statute that permits the secretary of education to “waive or modify” student-financial-assistance programs in a “national emergency”. It is up to the nine justices to decide whether some 26m Americans will have their debts reduced.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The sole winner of Syria’s disaster
It will be a grim update. The United Nations Security Council meets on Tuesday to discuss the earthquakes of February 6th that killed about 6,000 people in Syria (and about 44,000 in neighbouring Turkey). Tens of thousands of Syrian families are now homeless. Schools, hospitals and infrastructure were all badly damaged. The earthquakes compounded the misery caused by a decade of civil war. Aid has trickled into both the territory controlled by Syria’s regime and into the rebel-held north-west of the country. But it is a fraction of what is needed.

Only Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s dictator, seems to have benefited. Long a pariah, he had been gaining a measure of acceptance among other Arab leaders as they realised that he would not be overthrown. The quakes have sped that along. On Monday Egypt’s foreign minister made his first visit to Damascus since the war began. Saudi Arabia may be looking to reconcile with the regime. Syria’s leader is determined not to let a good crisis go to waste.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Republicans’ war of the words
A triumphalist memoir is the tell-tale sign of a coming presidential campaign. Many Republicans mulling a bid for the presidency in 2024—such as Nikki Haley and Mike Pompeo—have already penned theirs. On Tuesday Ron DeSantis, the Florida governor seen by most donors as having the best chance of defeating Donald Trump, releases his.

Mr DeSantis is not going for subtlety: the book’s title is “The Courage to be Free: Florida’s blueprint for America’s revival”. Beneath the usual banalities, readers will be looking for signs of his positions on subjects, such as foreign policy and trade, on which he has kept rather quiet while prosecuting culture wars. Mr Trump, who sees his fellow Floridian as the greatest threat to his retaking the White House, plans to depict Mr DeSantis as an enemy of old-age entitlement programmes like Social Security and Medicare. So far, there has been a cold war between the two men. It won’t remain cold for much longer.


Daily quiz
Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Monday: What is the stage name of the rapper and record producer Shawn Carter?

Tuesday: Which 19th century British medical reformer was also a statistical pioneer?

The most certain sign of wisdom is cheerfulness.

Michel de Montaigne
