The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (03:14 GMT / 11:14 Hong Kong)

Polling stations closed on the east coast and in the middle of America, as midterm voters across the country cast ballots to determine who will control congress. The House of Representatives may well flip from the Democrats to the Republicans—the GOP have already snatched two Floridian seats from their rivals. The race for the Senate, though, appears very close.

Many Americans are also choosing their state governors: in Florida the Republican incumbent, Ron de Santis, easily held on for a second term. In Maryland Wes Moore, the Democratic candidate, is to be the state’s first black governor. Maura Healey, another Democrat, will become the first openly lesbian governor, having reclaimed Massachusetts for the party.

A group of experts established by the UN told delegates at COP27 that there must be stricter rules to stop companies being dishonest about their climate action. António Guterres, the UN’s secretary-general, criticised the “rank deception” of fossil-fuel companies which have promised to slash their emissions yet use loopholes such as carbon offsetting to continue to invest in new production of oil, coal and gas.

Binance, a cryptocurrency exchange, is set to buy FTX, a competitor run by billionaire Sam Bankman-Fried, after the company faced financial difficulties and a liquidity crunch. Changpeng Zhao, Binance’s chief executive, tweeted that FTX had asked for his firm’s help in a difficult period. FTX’s FTT token dropped 30% earlier on Tuesday; Bitcoin and Ethereum also slumped earlier on news of the company’s struggles.

Protesters supporting Imran Khan, the former prime minister of Pakistan, blocked motorways around Islamabad, the capital, as part of an attempt to overthrow the government. On Thursday Mr Khan was shot in the leg in a failed assassination attempt; he alleges that Shehbaz Sharif, the prime minister, and civilian and military officials conspired to kill him. Pakistan’s police have launched an investigation into the attack.

The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights wants the immediate release of Alaa Abd el-Fattah, a jailed British-Egyptian activist, a spokesperson said on Tuesday. Mr Abd el-Fattah began a hunger strike in April and stopped taking water when COP27 began on Sunday. His family have begged Rishi Sunak, Britain’s prime minister, to obtain proof that Mr Abd el-Fattah is alive.

Disney said its streaming service added 12.1m subscribers in the three months through September while burning through $1.47bn—more than twice its loss in the same period last year. Disney+ is expected to turn profitable in 2024. Across its business the media giant reported lower-than-expected earnings, with revenues of $20.2bn, up by 9% year over year.

Fact of the day: 40%, the share of Ukraine’s energy infrastructure damaged by Russian missiles and kamikaze drones over the past month. Read the full story.

A red ripple across America

PHOTO: AP
Some Americans who rose early to vote on election day caught the morning’s lunar eclipse. The sky’s reddish hue was an auspicious sign for the Republicans, who are likely to win a majority in the House of Representatives and could take the Senate, too. “I’m anxious,” confessed a Democrat voting in Brooklyn. “I think it’s going to be a rout.”

The Economist’s statistical model suggests that a Republican ripple is more likely than a red wave. But the GOP will need to recover only one of the two branches of Congress to be able to stall President Joe Biden’s legislative agenda.

That is not an unusual outcome in midterm elections, where voters typically punish the party in the White House. Less common is the risk this election could pose to the democratic process in America. More than 180 Republican candidates—running for the House and Senate as well as for state-level administrator positions—deny that Donald Trump lost the 2020 presidential election. A majority have better-than-evens chances of winning.

A new chief justice in India

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Wednesday Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud will be appointed as the 50th chief justice of the Indian Supreme Court. As one of the court’s more liberal judges Mr Chandrachud has been instrumental in its most progressive decisions in recent years, including judgments that enshrined privacy as a fundamental right and decriminalised homosexuality.

Now, as “master of the roster”, Mr Chandrachud will decide when cases are heard and which of the court’s 28 judges will hear them. With nearly 70,000 cases pending, and just two years before he must retire at 65, he will have plenty to do. But his bigger challenge will be managing India’s increasingly muscular government.

Many Indians hope Mr Chandrachud can make the court a more effective counterweight to the Hindu-nationalist excesses of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, led by the prime minister, Narendra Modi. They will find out soon enough. Upcoming cases include controversial ones about the status of Kashmir and a citizenship law that many fear discriminates against Muslims.

The costs of China’s zero-covid policy

PHOTO: AP
Financial markets are rife with speculation about when the Chinese government might relax its strict zero-covid policy. One social-media message highlighting the rumours has been dubbed the “trillion-dollar tweet”, after it helped inspire a big rally in Chinese shares.

But even as investors contemplate a loosening of fetters in the future, China’s economy must endure them in the present. Official figures released on November 15th will probably show that retail sales shrank in nominal terms in October, compared with a year earlier. The growth of industrial production probably slowed, too. And figures due out on Wednesday are likely to reveal that consumer-price inflation softened.

This domestic weakness is all the more troubling because foreign demand for China’s goods is also faltering. The country’s exports shrank last month in dollar terms. When China eventually relaxes its zero-covid policy, it will be opening up to a global economy retreating into its shell.


France’s new defence policy

PHOTO: AFP
Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, will be winched from a helicopter on to an attack submarine near the port of Toulon on Wednesday, after making a speech unveiling a national strategic review. The review, drafted after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, will underline continuity in France’s approach to defence, including its ambition to strengthen “European strategic autonomy” in ways that are complementary to NATO, and its hopes of acting as what Mr Macron calls a “balancing power”.

The speech will include some novelties nonetheless. Mr Macron will announce the official end of Operation Barkhane, a French counterterrorism effort in the north African Sahel. He will add “influence” to a list of the country’s national strategic functions, with the aim of combatting disinformation and asserting France’s interests. The annual budget for the armed forces in 2023 will increase by 7.4% to €43.9bn ($44.2bn). And Mr Macron will stress the need for increased national “resilience”—from robust armed forces to industrial preparedness—to face the risk of further high-intensity warfare in Europe.

“The Crown” is back

PHOTO: NETFLIX
The fifth season of “The Crown”, a television series about the British royal family, is released on Netflix on Wednesday. It begins in the early 1990s. John Major (Jonny Lee Miller) is prime minister and Queen Elizabeth II (Imelda Staunton), in her 60s, stands accused by the press of trying to hoard power. Public support for Prince Charles (Dominic West) and his wife, Diana (Elizabeth Debicki), is high, and the heir is jostling for a bigger role.

Now that he has finally ascended to the throne, the timing of the series for King Charles is awkward. Britons optimistic about their new king could have their minds changed by its portrayal of his scheming and the breakdown of his marriage. The programme prompted criticism even before its release. Sir John (as he is now) suggested it was disrespectful to air it so soon after the queen’s death in September, and dismissed some depictions as “malicious nonsense”. In response Netflix issued a disclaimer reminding audiences that the show is a “fictional dramatisation”.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which boxer won the 1960 Olympic light-heavyweight title, in Rome, but was then refused service in a Kentucky restaurant when he returned to America?

Tuesday: “Go Set a Watchman” was the second published novel of which famous author?

Somewhere, something incredible is waiting to be known.

Carl Sagan