The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 10, 2023
President Joe Biden proposed a budget that would raise annual spending from about $6.3trn, or 25% of GDP, to $6.9trn in the next fiscal year. It would shrink America’s deficit by $2.9trn over the next decade from the current forecast, reducing it from about 6% of GDP to 5%, aided by $4.5trn in tax increases on high earners and firms. The blueprint is merely a starting-point in negotiations with House Republicans, who are demanding hefty spending cuts.

Power was restored to the Zaporizhia nuclear plant in south-east Ukraine, according to the country’s grid operator. It had been cut off from the electricity network after Russia launched a barrage of missiles across Ukraine, striking residential buildings and energy infrastructure. This is the sixth time the nuclear plant, the largest in Europe, has lost power since the war began.

While on a visit to Israel, Lloyd Austin, America’s defence secretary, said he was “disturbed” by violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinians. Earlier, three Palestinian militants were killed during an Israeli military raid. Separately, several demonstrators were arrested after mass protests continued across Israel in response to the government’s plans to overhaul the country’s judiciary.

Silicon Valley Bank’s share price plunged by more than 60% after the lender announced several measures to raise cash. SVB, which primarily serves early-stage tech firms, said that a fall in deposits amid the venture-capital winter had compelled it to sell bonds worth $21bn from its portfolio, at a loss of $1.8bn. SVB also initiated a sale of $1.8bn-worth of shares.

An ex-Goldman Sachs banker, Roger Ng, was sentenced to ten years in American prison for bribing officials and laundering money from 1MDB, Malaysia’s sovereign-wealth fund. Mr Ng and his former boss—who co-operated with prosecutors and will face sentencing in September—were accused of paying more than $1bn in bribes to win 1MDB business for Goldman.

In more news of corruption concerning Malaysia, Muhyiddin Yassin, a former prime minister, was arrested on graft charges. Mr Muhyiddin, who led the country from March 2020 to August 2021, denied wrongdoing and accused the current prime minister, Anwar Ibrahim, of “political persecution”. The arrest comes ahead of regional elections, where Mr Muhyiddin’s coalition is likely to pose a threat to Mr Anwar’s ruling party.

American unemployment claims rose to 211,000 from 190,000 in the first week of March, the highest levels since December. Though this could suggest a slight cooling of the labour market, other data indicate that it remains strong. This is a problem for central banks, which may struggle to contain inflation if robust markets do not soften.

Fact of the day: 20%, the percentage of working Egyptians employed by the government in 2021, down from 27% a decade ago. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Japan’s Kuroda era ends
On Friday Kuroda Haruhiko will preside over his last policy meeting as the Bank of Japan’s governor. During his ten years in charge, Mr Kuroda transformed Japan’s monetary policy, unleashing a so-called “bazooka” programme of easy money to tackle long-entrenched deflation. He will leave with inflation at a 40-year high of more than 4%—though mostly because of rising import costs. The BoJ has maintained its loose policy, hoping to see more sustainable wage growth before tightening. Yet that has put the bank’s yield-curve-control framework, a cap on long-term government-bond yields, under tremendous pressure.

Navigating the choppy waters ahead will fall to Ueda Kazuo, an academic who will succeed Mr Kuroda. Mr Ueda told parliamentary hearings that he will take his time before introducing major policy changes. And Mr Kuroda probably won’t adjust or scrap the bank’s yield-curve-control policy on his way out. That said, he has made a habit of making moves that surprise the markets.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Biden hosts Von der Leyen
When Joe Biden meets Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission’s president, at the White House on Friday the easy task will be expressing solidarity with Ukraine. Both made visits to Kyiv last month to see the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, and express their commitment to its resistance to Russia’s invasion. A joint show of support in Washington will reinforce that message.

But trickier conversations await. It is not clear that the Europeans and Americans are aligned on whether China is considering sending arms to Russia (as officials in Washington suspect)—and how to respond if it does. And European angst has been growing over the huge subsidies planned under America’s Inflation Reduction Act and other industrial-policy initiatives. The EU fears they will discriminate against European firms, especially in the green industries of the future. Still, the two leaders will be keen to keep a lid on such disagreements: the last thing Ukraine needs is for simmering transatlantic tensions to boil over.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America’s jobs boom
The remarkable run in America’s labour market has shown little sign of abating. On Friday new figures are expected to reveal that the economy added about 200,000 new jobs in February, on top of nearly 25m added since mass layoffs early in the covid pandemic in 2020. That has helped workers. With the unemployment rate now at 3.4%, the lowest in five decades, nominal wages have been climbing at a rapid clip.

But for central banks, this is a headache. Without some cooling of the labour market it will be hard for them to contain inflation. If the jobs data for February surpasses expectations, it will probably fuel predictions that the Federal Reserve will again deliver a jumbo-sized interest-rate increase when it meets later in March. By contrast, evidence of slower job creation and a deceleration in wage growth would help alleviate worries about economic overheating.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Rishi in Paris
Rishi Sunak, Britain’s prime minister, heads to Paris on Friday for a day of meetings with Emmanuel Macron, the French president, at the Elysée palace. Five years since the last bilateral summit, the mere fact that this one is happening at all is symbolic. It is meant to show that recent cross-channel bickering will be replaced by a serious working relationship. Discussions will focus on joint support for Ukraine, defence co-operation, nuclear energy and small-boats migration.

Behind the warm words, however, the summit’s scope will be limited. It will have none of the bilateral ambition on defence that marked the Franco-British summit in London in 2010. On small boats France rejects any British talk of systematically returning migrants who make it across the English Channel. And above all the French have still not digested AUKUS, a trilateral defence pact between Britain, America and Australia, which sank their own contract to supply Australia with submarines. The timing is awkward: three days after the summit, AUKUS leaders will meet in America.


PHOTO: ALAMY
The uncertain future of “Portrait of Omai”
Standing more than two metres high, Sir Joshua Reynolds’s proudly defiant “Portrait of Omai” is among the most impressive English paintings of the 18th century. The robed subject—a man named Mai (rather than “Omai”), depicted with tattooed forearms and bare feet—was the first Polynesian to visit Britain. In 1774 he sailed to London with Captain James Cook, a British explorer, attending the state opening of Parliament and even meeting King George III. Reynolds kept his portrait in his studio for the rest of his life.

But the painting’s future in Britain is uncertain. A temporary export ban imposed by the government expires on Friday. The measure was introduced a year ago to allow the National Portrait Gallery time to raise £50m ($59.6m) to buy the picture from its private owner, John Magner, an Irish business magnate and racehorse breeder. The sum has not yet been reached. Without an eleventh-hour intervention, the portrait could be permanently rehoused overseas.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Friday: Which actress starred with Clint Eastwood in many films including “Every Which Way but Loose”, “The Gauntlet” and “Sudden Impact”?

Thursday: Which former monk served as Cardinal of Westmister from 1976 to 1999?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Katie King, Vancouver, Canada
Anand Mahajan, Mumbai, India
Ivan Grabowski, Westwood, Massachusetts, America

They all gave the correct answers of minimum wage, margin, usury and equity. Last week’s answers were all taken from our A to Z of economics, a glossary of economic terms explained in plain English. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

The great difference between voyages rests not with the ships, but with the people you meet on them.

Amelia Barr
