The world in brief
April 24, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

European governments reacted angrily to a Chinese diplomat’s suggestion that ex-Soviet countries lacked a legal basis for statehood. China’s ambassador to France, Lu Shaye, also questioned whether Crimea—invaded and annexed by Russia in 2014—is part of Ukraine in a television interview on Friday. “There’s no place for ambiguity,” said Ukraine’s ambassador in Paris. France’s foreign ministry said it took note “with consternation” and stressed its “full solidarity” with its European allies. Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania said they would summon their respective Chinese envoys on Monday to seek an explanation.

American diplomats were evacuated from Sudan as the deadly struggle between the forces of two rival generals entered a second week. Other states, including France, Germany and Saudi Arabia, also began to extract their citizens. Attempts at a temporary ceasefire between the Sudanese armed forces and the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary unit, for the Muslim holiday of Eid al-Fitr have failed.

Abiy Ahmed, Ethiopia’s prime minister, said peace talks with the Oromo Liberation Army, a rebel group, would start on Tuesday in Tanzania. In November Abiy struck a truce with the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front, another group in the country’s north that had fought the government for two years. He appears eager to strike a similar pact with the OLA.

Bed, Bath & Beyond filed for bankruptcy after failing to reverse years of bad investments and departing customers. The once-ubiquitous American homeware chain rode a speculative wave of investor interest in late 2020; overpriced stock tumbled by more than 98% over the past 12 months. A $1bn share-sale deal collapsed in March after the company revealed that year-on-year sales fell sharply in the fourth quarter.

Indian police arrested a firebrand Sikh separatist, Amritpal Singh, who had been on the run for weeks after hundreds of his supporters raided a police station in February. The manhunt sparked protests outside Indian consulates in America, Britain and Canada. The struggle for a Sikh homeland, called Khalistan, to replace the north Indian state of Punjab, led to deadly violence in the 1980s.

Jeff Shell resigned as boss of NBCUniversal over an “inappropriate relationship with a woman in the company”. No successor was yet named at the American media conglomerate, which is owned by Comcast, a cable provider. Mr Shell oversaw the launch of Peacock, NBC’s streaming service that is expected to incur up to around $2bn in losses this year.

Wrexham, a 158-year old football club, won promotion back into the English football league after a 15-year absence. In 2021 Ryan Reynolds and Rob McElhenney, two American actors, invested £2m ($2.5m) in the “Red Dragons” as part of a takeover deal. The local club’s fan base has expanded globally to include Hollywood A-listers, some of whom descend on the small Welsh city to watch games.

Fact of the day: 4.5%. Apple’s share of the phone market in India. It’ll grow quickly. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Defence spending is booming
Has the Ukraine war started a new arms race? Yes, to judge by figures published on Monday by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, a think-tank. Global defence spending rose by 3.7% in real terms in 2022 to a record $2.24trn. It shot up by 9.2% in Russia and septupled in Ukraine. Farther west in Europe, military spending grew by 3.6% to levels unseen since the end of the cold war.

Yet the picture is fuzzy. The economic burden of armed forces, at 2.2% of GDP, remains close to its post-cold-war low. In part, the world economy has grown. Of the biggest arms spenders, America was flat and China dipped as a share of GDP. But many of the promised spending increases are yet to come. Inflation may abate. And geopolitical tension—a long war in Ukraine, and talk of a future one between America and China—will push countries to buy ever more weapons.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Could Europe become an offshore-wind giant?
On Monday the leaders and energy ministers of ten countries with North Sea coastlines will gather in the Belgian port of Ostend. They will discuss how to turn the body of water into a green power plant for Europe. The potential is huge. The North Sea is blessed with the unpleasantly gusty but powerful winds needed to keep offshore wind turbines spinning. It is also shallow, which makes it easier to anchor 100m-high turbines to its bed.

At an initial summit in Denmark last year, Belgium, Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands pledged to more than quadruple their combined offshore power generation capacity to at least 150 gigawatts by 2050, five times Europe’s and three times the world’s current total. They hope that will help to power Europe’s re-industrialisation. But turbine-makers complain of having to wait years for permits for new wind parks. And more headwinds will come from America and the solar champions of the Mediterranean, as they compete for green investments.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Investors have a Coke and a smile
Coca-Cola, maker of the world’s most valuable and recognisable fizzy-drink brand, announces its quarterly earnings on Monday. Analysts expect modest year-on-year rises in revenue and earnings per share (over the past month its share price has ticked steadily upwards). The company benefits from its diversified range of products beyond the flagship tooth-rotting stuff, to include sports drinks, bottled water, fruit juices and canned booze, many tailored to local tastes. It has paid off: the company sells these in more than 200 countries and territories.

But like many consumer-goods producers, Coca-Cola has struggled with rising input and transport costs. The company is also fighting America’s Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in court; if the IRS prevails in that battle, as looks likely, Coca-Cola may be on the hook for more than $3.3bn in tax and interest payments. Still, inflation-driven price rises have fuelled revenue growth, even as consumers took smaller gulps.


PHOTO: ALAMY
First Republic Bank bares its bruises
Three American banks failed in quick succession in March. One shared characteristic was a high fraction of large deposits, which are not insured by regulators; another was imprudent risk taking (on interest rates and crypto). After they failed, uninsured depositors started fleeing institutions that might be in similar trouble. Within a week or so First Republic Bank, in San Francisco, lost $70bn of deposits, a quarter of its deposit base. A consortium of banks agreed to inject $30bn into the lender to keep it afloat. Its share price has fallen by roughly 90% so far this year.

On Monday the bank reports its first quarter earnings. Expect to see evidence of losses because the bank, in all probability, had to sell assets to replace vanishing deposits. Moreover, in the absence of deposits—a low-cost source of funding—the bank’s funding costs will have risen, perhaps sharply. The scale of the damage will shed light on its chances of survival.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A gene to unlock male birth control
Despite its occasional side effects, the contraceptive pill has on the whole given many women freedom and relief. For men, the hormonal interferences of any such experimental pills have been more disruptive to other processes, like red-blood-cell production. None of the tests of injections, gels or hormonal pills tried so far has advanced beyond a clinical trial. But a new non-hormonal and reversible contraceptive approach shows promise, according to a paper published in Nature Communications.

Researchers at Washington State University discovered a gene called Arrdc5, found only in the testicles of mammals. When the gene was knocked out in mice, the males became infertile. This was because 98% of the sperm they produced had misshapen heads and therefore could not swim well or fertilise an egg. An inhibitor of Arrdc5 could therefore constitute a reversible male Pill. In February, a team at Weill Cornell Medicine, in New York, developed another chemical that also achieved short-term inhibition. A breakthrough may be getting closer.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: For which Woody Allen film did Cate Blanchett win the Best Actress Oscar?

All men would be tyrants if they could.

Daniel Defoe