The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 6 hours ago (22:29 GMT+1 / 05:29 Hong Kong)

France said Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, had told his French counterpart that UN inspectors could access the Zaporizhia nuclear plant in south-eastern Ukraine. An international mission would require a temporary ceasefire around the Russian-controlled power station, which has been the target of shelling for weeks, said French officials. Meanwhile António Guterres, the UN secretary-general, affirmed that Zaporizhia’s electricity belongs to Ukraine, amid fears that power could be diverted to the Russian grid. Ukraine and Russia have accused each other of planning further attacks at the plant.

Gazprom, Russia’s state-owned energy firm, said it would halt natural-gas deliveries to Europe via its main pipeline for three days at the end of August. It said the reason was unscheduled maintenance to Nord Stream 1, which links Russia to Germany via the Baltic sea and is already running at just a fifth of its capacity.

Xiao Jianhua, a Chinese-Canadian billionaire financier, was sentenced to 13 years in prison by a Chinese court, on charges of bribing officials to evade financial scrutiny as well as illegally obtaining public deposits and breaching trust. His company, believed to have links to high-ranking politicians, was fined a record sum of 55bn yuan ($8.1bn). Mr Xiao, seized from a Hong Kong hotel room in 2017, was tried behind closed doors in July.

Finland’s prime minister took a drug test to quell a brouhaha over video footage of her partying and dancing with friends. Sanna Marin, aged 36, said the results would put to rest the “grave public accusations” that she had used drugs, though she called demands for her to take a test “unjust”. The results will be available in a week.

Britons’ consumer confidence plunged to historic lows on Friday, according to research by data provider GfK. Respondents were gloomy about all five component parts of the consumer confidence index, reflecting “a sense of exasperation about the UK’s economy”, according to a GfK director. Separately, Britain reported a fall of 1.2% in retail sales in the three months to July.

Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor, denied allegations of impropriety in his management of a multibillion-euro tax fraud case while acting as mayor of Hamburg in 2017. Mr Scholz stands accused of deliberately failing to collect €47m ($47m) in tax payments from Warburg, a local bank. The investigation comes at a difficult time for Mr Scholz as he grapples with Germany’s energy crunch alongside his own dipping popularity.

Xiaomi, a Chinese tech company, reported a 20% revenue drop to 70.2bn yuan ($10.3bn) for the second quarter, a worse performance than analysts predicted. Net income dropped by 83% to 1.39bn. The company cited the pandemic, increased fuel prices, input costs and inflation as reasons for the downturn. Formerly China’s biggest smartphone brand, Xiaomi has struggled against domestic competition.

Word of the week: Umaibo, meaning “delicious stick” in Japanese, and the name of a beloved puffed-corn treat that made national news this year, when its price increased for the first time since 1979. Read the full story.

Navalny riles the Kremlin from jail

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Exactly two years ago the Kremlin tried to assassinate Alexei Navalny, its most prominent domestic critic. He fell ill on a flight over Siberia. After being evacuated to Germany it was confirmed that he had been poisoned with Novichok, a military nerve agent. Mr Navalny returned to Russia five months later and was duly imprisoned, but he has not been cowed.

The Kremlin is using the war in Ukraine to silence other critics. Prominent opposition politicians have been imprisoned on sham pretexts. Prohibitions on “discrediting” the army have in effect outlawed dissent. Independent-minded Russians have emigrated. And all the while, Mr Navalny has continued riling the authorities from behind bars. His latest ruse was to register a trade union for prisoners. Authorities then put him in solitary confinement. Mr Navalny says he was told the move was punishment for failing to fasten the top button of his prison uniform.

A rematch for boxing heavyweights

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Last September an underdog Ukrainian fighter, Oleksandr Usyk, defeated Anthony Joshua, a Briton who held three world heavyweight belts. Mr Usyk had built a successful career as a cruiserweight, but was widely expected to struggle after going up a division. Instead his superior technical skills humbled his opponent, who looked tactically naive and slow-footed.

On Saturday, in the Saudi Arabian city of Jeddah, Mr Joshua has his rematch. If he wins, his career will be back on track and negotiations for a lucrative title-unification fight with another British heavyweight, Tyson Fury, will resume. If he loses again, his career at the top of boxing will probably be over. Yet Mr Usyk has had the more difficult year. He enlisted in the Ukrainian army and his family home was temporarily seized by Russian fighters. He has ensured that the fight will be free for all Ukrainians to watch. This time, he will not be underestimated.

Australia wears its mullets with pride

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Native Americans once sported mullets. So did the ancient Greeks. But Australia sees the hairstyle as a badge of its national identity. On Saturday fans of the much-derided cut gather in Dubbo, a city in New South Wales, for an annual competition to find the finest mullets Down Under. The controversial look is eternally popular in outback Australia, but its recent proliferation has ignited a national debate.

Mullets have returned to fashion in the country’s professional sports leagues. They are trendy in schools and surfing communities. But not everyone is sold on the do: several private schools have banned the hairstyle and some pubs turn away mulleted men for falling short of dress codes. The issue has even percolated up to the top heads. The mullet is “a unique Australian invention—one which we’ve been selling to the world”, Western Australia’s “pro-mullet” premier, Mark McGowan, claimed last year. He advised the haircut’s fans to “rise up and rebel against these extreme rules”.

What to read to understand the history of Western capitalism

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
It is easy to be swept up in news about the economy, which can make it hard to step back and think about the bigger questions. Yet economic history can improve your understanding of the news. Here are five helpful resources.

“The Worldly Philosophers” by Robert Heilbroner is an excellent introduction to the history of economic ideas. It covers everyone from Adam Smith to Thomas Malthus to Karl Marx, explaining what they thought and why.

Also try “A Culture of Growth”, by Joel Mokyr, which deals squarely with the question of why Europe was the first region to industrialise—focusing on institutions.

And for much more European history, Jonathan Sumption’s 3,320-page “The Hundred Years’ War” shows just how different governance and politics were before capitalism.

Two of the best resources, though, are not books but journal articles. “War as an Economic Activity in the ‘Long’ Eighteenth Century”, by N.A.M. Rodger, emphasises the role of technology in economic success. In “Enclosures, Common Rights, and Women” Jane Humphries looks at the impact of that success by examining how lifestyles changed as capitalism came about.

For reading recommendations on many more topics, visit The Economist reads.

Weekend profile: Fani Willis, the local prosecutor taking on Trumpworld

PHOTO: EYEVINE
“It does not matter what your notoriety is, what your fame is, if you come to Fulton County, Georgia, and you commit crimes…we are going to prosecute you to the fullest extent of the law.” So said Fani Willis, the local district attorney, in May, unveiling gang-related charges against Young Thug, a Grammy-winning rapper, and 27 others. (Young Thug denies the charges.) But they could equally be seen as a warning to Donald Trump—another celebrity in Ms Willis’s sights.

For months Ms Willis has been investigating attempts by Mr Trump and his allies to overturn his 2020 election loss in Georgia. (Mr Trump has denied wrongdoing.) Her probe—one of several he faces—is sprawling. Among its targets are Rudy Giuliani, Mr Trump’s former lawyer, and the Republican “fake electors” who falsely tried to certify the vote for the former president.

Charges, if and when they come, might allege a co-ordinated, criminal scheme to commit election fraud. Ms Willis has a history of using racketeering laws, which target criminal “enterprises” like the Mafia. In 2013 she used these laws to secure an indictment against teachers and administrators for inflating pupils’ exam scores, in a case that made national headlines; 11 of the 12 defendants were convicted. Her charges against Young Thug’s cohort also allege racketeering.

Ms Willis is a formidable opponent. Described as a “street-fighter” in the courtroom, she has spent most of her career in the office she now leads. In 2020 she handily beat her former boss to win the top job. On her first day as district attorney, news broke of Mr Trump’s demand that Brad Raffensperger, Georgia’s elections chief, “find 11,780 votes”. That notorious call launched a career-defining probe.

Ms Willis maintains that she takes “no pleasure” in going after a former president. Opponents say she is on a politically motivated crusade. Last month a judge scolded her for hosting a fundraiser for the Democratic rival of a Republican whom she was investigating, and disqualified her from pursuing him.

Her inquiry is likely to last for months yet. As it gathers pace, Trumpworld may heed the words of 50 Cent, another rapper, on racketeering charges: “Those laws were designed for you not to escape them.”

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Cryptic clues

1 down: Twisted aria about freeloading, disgruntled loser (5,6)

1 across: Country built up from ideas? Sure—without freedom (6)

2 across: President lost in a dream about reversing (5)

3 across: Oh no! First kids arrive in a state (6)

Factual clues

1 down: Son of Kenya’s first vice-president (5,6)

1 across: One of three “potash powers” (with Belarus and Canada) (6)

2 across: Democrat who carried Maine’s second district twice (5)

3 across: Where salmon migration is a political issue (6)

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent in Friday’s edition.


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Jin-Hong Park, Suwon, South Korea

North America: Heather Burnett Gold, Leesburg, USA

Central and South America: Alvaro Tomas, Panama City, Panama

Europe: Finnbogi Óskarsson, Reykjavík, Iceland

Africa: Richard Small, Johannesburg, South Africa

Oceania: John Wright, Auckland, New Zealand

They all submitted the correct answers of “MASH”, “The Cask of Amontillado”, Stephen Stills, grain and dram. The theme is whiskey, which is mashed, matured in a cask, distilled in stills, made from grain and a drink of which is often referred to as a “dram”.

A smile is a curve that sets everything straight.

Phyllis Diller
