The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 4, 2023
Yevgeny Prigozhin, the head of the Wagner Group, said that his Russian mercenaries had “practically surrounded” Bakhmut, a city in eastern Ukraine. After months of bloody fighting Russia appears close to its first notable victory in almost half a year. The success is unlikely to lead to a breakthrough— Ukrainian troops can form a new defensive line to the west. Meanwhile, Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, signed a decree allowing his government to take over companies that fail to fulfil their defence contracts in areas under martial law.

A Belarusian court sentenced Ales Bialiatski, a Nobel-Prize-winning human rights activist, to ten years in prison for financing protests. Mr Bialiatski helped to found Viasna (“Spring”) in 1996, an organisation that defends political prisoners. Belarusian authorities arrested Mr Bialiatski in 2020 when he returned to Belarus to take part in mass demonstrations against Alexander Lukashenko, after the president rigged an election.

Alex Murdaugh, an ex-lawyer from South Carolina convicted of killing his wife and son, was sentenced to life in prison. The case captured national attention for its true-crime twists: Mr Murdaugh allegedly robbed clients of $8m over decades and tried to stage his own death for an insurance payout. In addition to the murder convictions, he is charged with almost 100 financial crimes.

Nigeria’s Supreme Court ruled that a botched replacement of the country’s bank notes was illegal, saying that the government had not given people sufficient time to exchange. The central bank attempted to swap all existing bank notes in only a few months, causing widespread panic as banks ran dry. Nigeria is still reeling from a chaotic presidential election last week. Both opposition parties dispute the result.

Protests continued across Greece after a fatal train collision on Tuesday that killed at least 57 people. A nationwide strike of rail workers ran into its second day; the country’s main railway union demanded a meeting with the new transport minister. Anger has been directed at Greece’s government for failing to properly maintain the railways.

Amazon, an American e-commerce giant, said it would delay the expansion of its second headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. While the first part of “HQ2” will be completed this June, it is now unclear when construction of the second section will begin. The company has struggled since a pandemic-related boom in demand for its services ended. In January it announced 18,000 layoffs.

Canada’s health department gave permission to Sunshine Earth Labs, a bioscience firm, to begin making and selling cocaine. The company will offer its product to hospitals and labs. Canada has been struggling to reduce drug overdoses. This year the state of British Columbia decriminalised the possession of small amounts of hard drugs to try and encourage addicts to seek help without fearing prosecution.

Word of the week: Altasia, a portmanteau referring to the alternative Asian supply chain. These countries could lure manufacturing away from China. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A precarious result in Nigeria
On March 1st Bola Tinubu was declared the winner of Nigeria’s presidential election with 37% of the vote. That made it the closest race in decades. The contest was chaotically organised and the count was messy. There were reports of ballot-snatching and violent incidents at polls. The technology to transmit results failed.

The losers are not pleased. Peter Obi—a third-party wildcard who was the favourite in the polls but received 25% of the vote—has launched a legal challenge. He has successfully overturned lower-level elections before. Atiku Abubakar, the main opposition party’s candidate (29%), also indicated he will appeal to the courts and joined Mr Obi in demanding a fresh vote.

A re-run is unlikely. But Mr Tinubu, whose incumbent All Progressives Congress party has made Nigerians poorer, will struggle to secure a mandate. The results were transparent in one sense: they showed a country still deeply divided by language, religion and ethnicity.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America’s “last great race” is on thin ice
On Saturday teams of sled dogs and their drivers (known as “mushers”) will set off on the Iditarod, a race of about 1,000 km across the Alaskan wilderness. Dubbed “the last great race”, the event typically takes ten days to complete. Competitors roughly trace the route used in 1925 to deliver antitoxins from Anchorage, the state’s largest city, to Nome, a remote town that faced a diphtheria epidemic.

The 33 teams participating will be the fewest ever. That will fuel concerns about the Iditarod’s future in the face of a changing economic climate, as well as a physical one. Lack of snow has compelled the organisers to shift the start line northwards several times since it began in 1973, and there are worries that rising temperatures will make the race more dangerous by reducing the amount of ice. The covid-19 pandemic was disastrous for many mushers, who often make their living giving sled rides to tourists. And the prize money is increasingly paltry—last year’s pot of almost $52,000 was little more than the $50,000 up for grabs in 1985.


Economics, simply put
There is a limit to the amount of information that a person can absorb. This means that choices which they believe to be informed and rational can look irrational to someone with greater knowledge. As any behavioural economist worth their salt could tell you, this theory of decision-making is known as “bounded rationality”.

But you’d be forgiven for not knowing that. Economics is littered with complicated-sounding ideas that, once grasped, help to make sense of the world. So we have published a glossary of economic terms, explained in plain English. Our A to Z of economics includes almost 500 cross-referenced entries. Some link to longer explainer articles exploring the topic in more detail. And we’ll keep adding to the list. So the next time you’re puzzled by the Nash equilibrium or struggling to explain quantitative tightening you’ll know where to look. We hope it offers you an absolute advantage (which is also, conveniently, the first entry on the list).


PHOTO: NETFLIX
Chris Rock goes live
Chris Rock will chart new comedy territory on Saturday by performing stand-up on Netflix’s first globally streamed live show. The streaming service has long viewed stand-up comedy as big business and last year it added an in-person festival in Los Angeles, “Netflix is a Joke”, to its regular offerings of pre-recorded shows.

Broadcasting live is typically the domain of traditional television. But Netflix needs to innovate as it struggles to attract fresh audiences in response to dwindling revenues. (It has also trialled alternative payment plans, including some with adverts, to supplement its subscription model.) Although details about the show are scant, the performance marks the first anniversary of an infamous event in Hollywood: when Will Smith, an actor, slapped Mr Rock at the Oscars. The comedian has yet to speak about the incident to a global audience. Viewers will tune in expecting some jabs at the culprit. Netflix, meanwhile, will be hoping for the last laugh.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Jaz Brisack, the 25-year-old taking on Starbucks
Jaz Brisack was down an internet rabbit hole when she discovered Eugene Debs. Something clicked while reading the American trade unionist’s fiery defence of socialism, delivered in 1918, in which he pledged solidarity with all types of oppressed people. There could be no equality—whether racial, gender or anything else—without class liberation, she realised.

Ms Brisack got to work. In 2017, while a student at the University of Mississippi, she interned as a union campaigner at a Nissan car plant. Although that fight to unionise failed, her next one, at a SPoT Coffee shop in Buffalo, New York, triumphed. Flush with success, Ms Brisack decamped to Oxford University on a Rhodes scholarship.

Academia felt too remote, however. She rushed through her degree in one year rather than the customary two, eager to return to Buffalo. Ms Brisack had heard murmurs of union talk among Starbucks baristas there, and she decided to become one herself, landing the 5am shift. In between pour-overs and lattes she rallied colleagues. In December 2021 the cafe where she worked became the first in the country to unionise. More than 250 have followed, out of 9,000 operated by Starbucks.

The firm, she says, waged “psychological warfare”. It sacked pro-union workers, closed a cafe with restive employees and held mandatory meetings to resist the union drive. But vindication awaited. On Wednesday an administrative judge at the National Labour Relations Board ruled that Starbucks committed hundreds of labour-law violations and criticised its “reign of coercion”. (The firm is expected to appeal against the decision.) Howard Schultz, the interim boss who prides himself on a progressive work culture and has said that unions do not have a “place” at Starbucks, was ordered to read or attend the reading of a pledge not to suppress union activity. Bernie Sanders, a progressive senator, has called on him to testify before Congress next week.

Ms Brisack, now 25, left Starbucks (she claims she was forced out) in September and has begun organising workers at a Tesla factory in Buffalo. It may not be the last time she agitates from within a company. They are surprisingly bad at doing their homework on prospective hires, she says, demurring when asked which are in her sights. “It has to be a surprise.”


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Stay silent after little bet, lost, results in lowest possible pay-out (7, 4)

1 across Abominable, heartless man destroyed Riga’s perimeter (6)

2 across A great deal of interest in takeover thwarted by unknown entity (5)

3 across Value of desert in westernmost parts of East Yemen (6)

Factual clues

1 down One way of protecting workers from exploitation (7, 4)

1 across The difference between the cost of producing something and its revenues, for example (6)

2 across Interest rates such as those offered by loan sharks (5)

3 across A form of long-term capital raised from investors (6)



The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Vivek Vankayalapati, Salt Lake City, America

Mark Lovewell, Toronto, Canada

Carlos Sangil, Madrid, Spain

They all gave the correct answers of war criminals, Warsaw, index and Scholz. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.


The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Gee Ranasinha, Strasbourg, France

José Ramón Vega, Samaná, Dominican Republic

Carlos Flexa Ribeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

They all gave the correct answers of Jay-Z, Florence Nightingale, Robin Givens, Stephen Crane and Sheryl Crow. The theme is that all share their names with birds: jay, nightingale, robin, crane and crow.

A critic is a man who knows the way but can't drive the car.

Kenneth Tynan
