The world in brief
June 16, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A long-awaited report found that Boris Johnson, Britain’s former prime minister, lied to Parliament deliberately and repeatedly. A cross-party group of MPs examined Mr Johnson’s testimony about parties held at Downing Street during the pandemic. It concluded that he had demonstrated “serious contempt” for which there was “no precedent”. The report would have recommended a suspension from Parliament for 90 days, had Mr Johnson not resigned last week after receiving an advance copy. He claimed to be the victim of a “political hit job”.

The European Central Bank raised interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point to a benchmark of 3.5%, the highest level in 22 years. The announcement contrasts with the America’s Federal Reserve decision to pause tightening on Wednesday. Euro-zone inflation, at 6.1% in May, is now above America’s and will remain “too high for too long,” warned the ECB.

Russia announced that it would hold elections in September in occupied areas of Ukraine, which it considers “the new subjects of the Russian Federation”. Ukraine, meanwhile, claimed “partial success” in its counter-offensive against Russian forces in Zaporizhia, one of the contested regions. Ukraine’s top general said his troops had recaptured about 100 sq km (40 sq miles) of land.

America’s Supreme Court upheld the Indian Child Welfare Act, a law passed in 1978 that impels states to prioritise placing Native adopted children in Native homes, in part to protect cultural traditions. In a 7-2 decision, the majority of justices disagreed with the plaintiffs’ argument that the law amounted to congressional overreach and racial discrimination.

Greece declared three days of national mourning after a migrant boat sank off its southern coast, killing at least 79 people in the deadliest shipwreck of its kind so far this year. Rescuers saved more than 100 people from the water, though their efforts were hampered by strong winds. The boat was reportedly carrying 400 people from Libya to Italy.

Australia’s government rushed through legislation to stop Russia from building a new embassy next to the parliament in Canberra, citing national security concerns. Australia’s prime minister, Anthony Albanese, said security agencies gave him “clear” warning of the risk posed by its proximity. In May a federal court overturned an official decision last year to terminate Russia’s lease, which it has held since 2008.

China’s central bank lowered an important medium-term lending rate for the first time in ten months. The People’s Bank of China also said it was offering $33bn to banks to safeguard liquidity. Earlier this week, the bank cut a short-term lending rate. The measures are a response to China’s flailing economic recovery after the pandemic. Property data released on Thursday revealed more weaknesses.

Figure of the day: $2.1trn, the American government’s revenue shortfall in the year to May—equivalent to 8.1% of GDP. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Bank of Japan sticks to ultra-loose policy
Since Ueda Kazuo took over as the Bank of Japan’s governor in April, he has bolstered his reputation as a man of restraint. Speculation has been rife that the bank might exit from its ultra-loose monetary policy. But Mr Ueda insists it will “patiently” maintain its approach, which was designed to haul the country out of decades of deflation. When the bank concludes a two-day meeting on Friday, Mr Ueda will probably continue policies including yield-curve control, which caps ten-year government-bond yields.

Now inflation is back. Prices excluding fresh food and fuel rose by 4.1% in April from a year earlier—the biggest increase in four decades. Some analysts suggest this heralds the beginning of a virtuous cycle, which will lift wages and consumer spending. But the evidence so far is thin. Wages have risen by just 1% over the past year, meaning workers are enduring pay cuts in real terms.


PHOTO: EPA
Britain’s sky-high food prices
Tesco, Britain’s biggest supermarket, will publish a quarterly trading statement on Friday. The update for investors comes amid pressure from politicians to tackle Britain’s cost-of-living crisis. According to the Office for National Statistics, hard-pressed consumers now fret more about rising food prices than they do about the cost of energy. The ONS estimates that food is dearer by around a fifth than it was a year ago, the second-highest jump in more than 45 years.

The Conservative government has suggested an agreement with leading supermarkets to cap prices of some basic items such as milk and bread. The British Retail Consortium, a trade body, says the plan will not work. It blames the higher costs that retailers are incurring for energy and labour. Tesco’s profits will be closely scrutinised for any sign that these inflated costs, rather than higher margins, are pinching customers’ wallets.


PHOTO: AP
SCOTUS season heats up
America’s Supreme Court justices have just two weeks to release 20 decisions in cases heard between October and April. The most important of the three rulings handed down on Thursday was in Haaland v Brackeen, a 7-2 decision rebuffing an attempt to hobble the Indian Child Welfare Act. This law, enacted in 1978, protects Native American children from being removed from their families and tribes. Only Justices Samuel Alito and Clarence Thomas agreed with plaintiffs’ claims that the law amounted to congressional overreach.

More decisions are expected to arrive on Friday. Does the First Amendment give a Christian web designer the right to refuse to make websites for gay weddings, a state anti-discrimination law notwithstanding? Can President Joe Biden proceed with his plan to relieve millions of borrowers of a portion of their student debt? How generously must employers accommodate workers’ religious beliefs? Is race-based affirmative action in university admissions compatible with the constitution? Stay tuned.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Can “Bazball” win England the Ashes?
The Ashes, a biennial cricket series between Australia and England, is steeped in tradition. But this year’s edition, which starts on Friday at the Edgbaston ground in Birmingham, will feature something radical. Over the past year, England has revolutionised Test cricket by injecting pace into a very slow game. English batsmen have been scoring at five runs an over, when the norm is closer to three. This hyper-aggressive style, nicknamed “Bazball” after Brendon McCullum, the team’s coach, has borne fruit: England have won 11 of their past 13 Tests, a form of cricket match that lasts five days, many in record-breaking manner.

The matches against Australia will be Bazball’s toughest test yet: the Aussies won Test cricket’s world championship last week. Still, England could yet lay claim to being the world’s best team. According to our own Test-cricket rankings, if they were to win three tests in the five-match series then they would leapfrog Australia and India into top spot.



PHOTO: ROGER DO MINH/POP. 87 PRODUCTION
Wes Anderson’s “Asteroid City”
The robin’s-egg blue skies and sandy stretches of desert in “Asteroid City” evoke a Kodachrome postcard. This charming film is the latest marvel of design from Wes Anderson, an American director who delights fans with his pastel palettes and deadpan characters. In this movie Mr Anderson lovingly and comically sketches a mourning family’s adventures during a science convention for child prodigies, set in a flyspeck town in the mid-century American West.

Mr Anderson’s meticulously crafted world has a crucial quality that a lot of studio output lacks: personality. That extends to the cast. Scarlett Johansson plays a droll film starlet whose daughter is among the prodigies; Jeffrey Wright is a military general who emcees the convention. “Asteroid City” feels nostalgic for a bygone Hollywood era of top-notch production values and casts. Mr Anderson’s distinctive aesthetic has inspired parodies, but the gently bittersweet heart of this film suggests that there is more than meets the eye in his elaborate concoctions.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: What name was given to the Maluku or Molucca islands by colonial powers because of the valuable commodities grown there?

Thursday: Which breed, known best for its distinctive stance, is known as a “bird dog” in the southern US?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya
Nicola Cenedese, Treviso, Italy
Brenda Eaton, Victoria, Canada

They all gave the correct answers of Ayatollahs, Atoms, Odds, Smoke. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

I never change, I simply become more myself.

Joyce Carol Oates
