The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 2 hours ago (00:46 GMT / 08:46 Hong Kong)

Ukraine’s Zaporizhia power plant was hit by shelling on Saturday and Sunday, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency, which warned that such attacks risked causing a nuclear disaster. Russia and Ukraine blamed each other for the attack on the facility, which is in Russian-controlled territory. Rafael Grossi, the head of the IAEA, warned “whoever is behind this” that “you’re playing with fire”.

COP27 in Egypt finally concluded on Sunday morning, 36 hours late, with delegates agreeing to establish a “loss and damage” fund to help those most affected by rising temperatures—something many thought impossible two weeks ago. That seemed to be broadly welcomed by environmental groups. They were less enthused by timid measures to curb the use of fossil fuels.

A 22-year-old was named as a suspect in the Colorado shooting that killed at least five people and injured dozens more. Anderson Lee Aldrich is accused of opening fire at a gay nightclub before being stopped by local patrons. Joe Biden, America’s president, said that inequities that “contribute to violence against LGBTQI+ people” must be driven out.

China’s defence ministry said it was willing to meet with America at a regional security summit in Cambodia this week. Talks between Lloyd Austin, America’s defence secretary and Wei Fenghe, his Chinese counterpart, would be the first military ones at a high level since China halted such communications after the visit of Nancy Pelosi, America’s House Speaker, to Taiwan in August.

Beijing told the 3.5m residents of its most populous district to stay at home from Monday, in a bid to contain rising covid-19 infections. China’s capital reported 516 new infections as of 3pm on Sunday, as well as the death of an 87-year-old man, China’s first known covid fatality since May 26th. The government recently announced a slight easing of its most draconian covid-control policies.

Donald Trump’s Twitter account was reactivated after Elon Musk, Twitter’s new boss, ran a poll on the social-media platform asking users whether the former president should be allowed back. They narrowly voted “yes”. Mr Trump, who was banned in the wake of the Capitol riot in 2021, snubbed the gesture. He had said that he will remain on Truth Social, his own platform.

Qatar had a disappointing start to the World Cup. The hosts lost 2-0 to Ecuador in the opening night of the tournament. It is the first time a host country has lost an opening match in the history of the World Cup. The upset was witnessed by Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Qatar’s emir, other royals and a crowd of 60,000 people.

Fact of the day: 90%, the percentage of its revenue that FIFA makes from the World Cup. Read the full story.

The long road ahead for Evergrande

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Monday a plot of land in Shenzhen, a city in south China, will go up for auction. It was supposed to be the new headquarters for Evergrande. But thoughts of a shiny new office are far off for the struggling Chinese property developer. The company is months behind schedule for releasing a plan on restructuring its massive debts. The group, which has some $300bn in liabilities, has been the bellwether for China’s embattled property industry. It defaulted in December, promising to produce a restructuring plan within six months. But investors remain in the dark.

The Chinese government recently announced measures that will help distressed property firms. Bank loans for some companies that were due in the next six months can now be extended. But it is unclear how much this will help Evergrande, which is still being forced to hock assets, such as the land in Shenzhen, to avoid collapse.


After COP27, hopes for climate mitigation look to Dubai

After the tortuous brokering of COP27 finally ended, Frans Timmermans, the EU’s lead negotiator, took to the floor. “Tomorrow,” he told delegates, “we start preparing for COP28”. Like many, Mr Timmermans was disappointed that the summit in Egypt did not go further to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions. He also stressed the need for countries at the next conference—which will be held in Dubai in November 2023—to make a firm commitment to reduce their use of all fossil fuels.

That might be tricky. Oil and natural gas power the economy of the United Arab Emirates, the next host. Alongside other petrostates, it fought to stop fossil fuels from being discussed more highly in Sharm el-Sheikh. And although the biggest breakthrough at COP27 was the agreement to establish a “loss and damage” fund to help vulnerable countries recover after disasters, the details of how that fund might operate will now have to be agreed.

Twitter’s mass unfollowing

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Soon after becoming Twitter’s owner, chief executive and only board member on October 27th, Elon Musk ordered staff to stop working from home and get back to the office. Last Thursday they received an email announcing, without explanation, that the firm’s San Francisco headquarters were closed. On Monday the office will re-open. The question is how many staff will come back.

If Mr Musk’s three weeks in charge have looked chaotic from the outside (the latest: reinstating Donald Trump’s account, following an online poll), internally they have been even bumpier. He sacked half the employees in his first week, and later laid off contractors moderating content. Last week he ordered remaining staff to re-commit to “extremely hardcore” work, or leave. Many reportedly walked.

Twitter had been over-staffed, relative to peers. But the scale and speed of the exodus is destabilising. Mr Musk warned recently that Twitter could run out of money. Before that it may run out of people.

Kosovo and Serbia look for a deal

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Albin Kurti, Kosovo’s prime minister, and Aleksandar Vucic, Serbia’s president, meet in Brussels on Monday as the EU seeks to calm the latest tensions between the Balkan neighbours. The meeting coincides with a deadline set by Kosovo for drivers in mostly ethnically Serb areas to ditch Serbia-issued licence plates, or face a fine when driving in Kosovo.

Kosovo, where the majority of people are ethnic Albanians, declared independence from Serbia in 2008. Although 117 countries recognise it internationally, Serbia does not. The latest spat, which has prompted Kosovo Serbs to quit some of the country’s institutions, has only increased tensions.

Even if Messrs Kurti and Vucic can cobble together a deal on number plates, more needed is an agreement on major issues such as the proposed creation of an “association” of Kosovo Serb municipalities. But that would require unpopular political risks, which neither leader is willing to take.

In “Glass Onion”, Hollywood targets the mega-rich

PHOTO: JOHN WILSON/NETFLIX © 2022
In 2019 Rian Johnson, a director, introduced viewers to the camp murder mystery of “Knives Out”, starring Daniel Craig as Benoit Blanc, a detective extraordinaire, sniffing out a killer in a clique of entitled snobs in Massachusetts. Now Mr Johnson is back with “Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery,” another mind-bendingly intricate whodunnit starring Mr Craig, this time set on a private Greek island.

Mr Johnson’s delightfully colourful and clever comedy, which is released in America and Britain on November 23rd, is part of an intriguing trend. Two other recent releases have crass multi-millionaires getting their bloody comeuppance on small islands: “The Menu”, starring Ralph Fiennes as a vengeful celebrity chef, and “Triangle Of Sadness”, the winner of the Palme d’Or at this year’s Cannes Film Festival.

Hollywood has tended to revere the super-rich, but now it seems that the knives are out.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Blood-, grey- and fox- are all followed by which suffix?

We should be considerate to the living; to the dead we owe only the truth.

Voltaire
