The world in brief
May 19, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Tens of thousands of Israeli nationalists took part in a controversial march through the Muslim quarter of Jerusalem’s Old City, in an annual event expected to flare tensions with Palestinians. The Jerusalem Day march, which marks Israel’s capture of the east of the city in the 1967 war, has become increasingly dominated by Jewish ultra-nationalists. Some far-right government ministers attended.

Kevin McCarthy, the Republican speaker of the House of Representatives, said a deal on America’s debt ceiling may be agreed as soon as this weekend; he then expects his chamber to consider it next week. President Joe Biden said on Wednesday that he was “confident” a deal would be reached. Mr Biden, who is in Japan for the G7, has shown willingness to concede adding work requirements to some anti-poverty schemes, to the frustration of some Democrats.

Disney cancelled plans to build a corporate campus near Orlando, Florida and move more than 2,000 jobs there. A tax credit on the nearly $1bn site would have allowed Disney to recoup up to $570m over 20 years. But the firm has fallen out with Florida’s Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, in a tit-for-tat starting with its opposition to the “Don’t say gay” law.

The Wall Street Journal reported that Mr DeSantis will officially enter the presidential race next week. He is expected to file paperwork declaring his candidacy on May 25th, coinciding with a donor meeting in Miami. Mr DeSantis will be Donald Trump’s biggest rival for the Republican nomination—he is currently coming second to the former president in polls.

America’s Supreme Court declined to weaken tech companies’ shield from liability over user-generated content. Plaintiffs had argued, unsuccessfully, that Twitter and Google bore legal responsibility for hosting terrorism-related posts. At a hearing in February the justices seemed disinclined to disrupt the legal status quo. “These are not like the nine greatest experts on the internet”, said one.

Deutsche Bank will pay $75m to settle accusations that it benefited from human trafficking by retaining Jeffrey Epstein as a client. It is probably “the largest sex-trafficking settlement involving a banking institution in American history”, according to lawyers. The German bank was alleged to have facilitated Epstein’s sex-trafficking network. Deutsche Bank did not immediately comment on the settlement.

Rafael Nadal, a 36-year-old Spanish tennis star, will miss the French Open later this month—for the first time in 19 years. Mr Nadal, who shares the men’s grand slam singles record with Serbia’s Novak Djokovic, blamed an ongoing hip injury. He also announced his plan to retire in 2024.

Fact of the day: 25%, the share of global output generated by America. It has 4% of the world’s people. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The G7’s limited influence
Leaders from the G7, a club of large rich democracies, will begin their annual summit on Friday in Hiroshima, Japan. The group’s relevance has faded as its economic heft has declined: members’ share of global GDP in nominal terms was less than 45% in 2021, down from almost 70% in the late 1980s. But the need to co-ordinate assistance to Ukraine and sanctions against Russia has given the G7 fresh purpose. The war, accordingly, will top the agenda in Hiroshima.

That will not boost the G7’s diminishing influence among poorer countries, many of which grumble about the war’s impact on food and energy markets and dislike America’s talk of democracy versus autocracy. As host, Japan is keen to address concerns that—when it comes to wooing the developing south—the West is trailing behind China, which offers more investment and fewer lectures. The summit will therefore test both the G7’s resolve and Japan’s ability to be a bridge between the group and the wider world.



PHOTO: REUTERS
Syria’s dictator is back in the fold
Bashar al-Assad’s appearance at the Arab League summit in Saudi Arabia, on Friday, will be a stomach-churning spectacle. It is the first time the Syrian dictator’s regime has been invited since its suspension in 2011. For a decade Mr Assad was a regional pariah because he plunged Syria into a civil war that killed half a million people. Now he will make a return to normal Arab politics.

Mr Assad hopes to persuade rich Gulf states to spend money rebuilding his ruined country. Some 90% of Syrians live in poverty, the currency is debased and the infrastructure wrecked. His neighbours, in turn, hope better ties will let them send home Syrian refugees, persuade Mr Assad to distance himself from Iran, and stem the flow of Captagon, an amphetamine that is now Syria’s main export. Yet none of those seems likely: the Assad regime, which feels victorious after surviving the war, is in no mood for concessions.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Jeffrey Epstein’s afterlife in the courtroom
Jeffrey Epstein hanged himself in 2019 while awaiting trial on federal sex-trafficking charges. Yet the legal wrangling around him continues. In December the government of the US Virgin Islands sued JPMorgan Chase. It argued that, by providing financial services and failing to report suspicious activities, the bank helped Epstein traffic women at his estate in the territory. The bank denies these allegations. It has sued Jes Staley, a former executive responsible for its relationship with Epstein, arguing that he should pay damages if he knew about the accusations.

Mr Staley’s lawyers will appear in court on Friday in New York to try to have that suit dismissed. The questions will continue regardless: the US Virgin Islands wants to subpoena Elon Musk about potential communication with Epstein. Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan’s boss, will face two days of questioning in the Virgin Islands. Meanwhile, on Wednesday, it was announced that Deutsche Bank will pay $75m to settle accusations (in a different case) that it benefited from sex trafficking by retaining Epstein as a client.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
John Deere’s bumper harvest
Usually a slowing economy means stalling sales for machine-makers, as customers try to use their existing equipment as long as possible. Yet business has been booming recently for John Deere, an American farm-equipment giant. High crop prices, buoyed by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, have nudged cash-flush farmers to upgrade their kit just as the company’s pandemic-era supply-chain problems have eased. Analysts expect John Deere to report on Friday year-on-year sales growth of 23% for the first quarter of 2023.

High crop prices are not the only reason the company’s shares are trading at double their pre-pandemic levels. The firm has been bringing its products into the digital age. It has added driverless tractors, drones and weed-spotting sprayers to its product line, and has been hiring techies laid off by Silicon Valley firms. In January John Deere’s boss gave the opening address at the Consumer Electronics Show—a clear testament to its changing corporate identity.


PHOTO: RITIKA SHAH
The significance of the sari
Women in India and other parts of South Asia have worn saris for some 5,000 years. Recently, celebrities and fashionistas in the West have also recognised their appeal: Meghan Markle, Dua Lipa and Oprah Winfrey have all been seen sporting one. A new exhibition at the Design Museum in London, opening on Friday, digs deeper into the cultural significance and future of one of the most enduring and recognisable forms of dress.

“The Offbeat Sari” traces how the weave and texture of sari fabrics have inspired new ways of creating and decorating textiles outside South Asia, and how contemporary Indian designers are increasingly reimagining saris as components of other garments or as pieces of conceptual art. It also looks at the ways in which female demonstrators in rural India brandish their saris to emphasise their anger. Pleated, folded and thrown over the shoulder, the sari can be both traditional and trailblazing.


Daily Quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which British admiral lost both an arm and partial sight in one eye during his illustrious naval career?

Thursday: Which Australian male tennis player won his only Grand Slam title at Wimbledon in 1987?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Anne Poels, Ontario, Canada

Carlos Sangil, Madrid, Spain

Nivedita Ganapathy, Bangalore, India

They all gave the correct answers of Kilicdaroglu, kidnap, drone and Uffizi. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Never be afraid to sit a while and think.

Lorraine Hansberry
