The world in brief May 20, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 05:48 GMT+1 London

Joe Biden said Finland and Sweden had the “full, total, complete backing of the United States” as they apply to join NATO, a move prompted by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Standing next to Magdalena Andersson, Sweden’s prime minister, and Sauli Niinisto, Finland’s president, in Washington, DC, the American president said the Nordic countries “meet every NATO requirement and then some”.

America’s Senate overwhelmingly approved a $40bn military and humanitarian package for Ukraine. It is America’s largest foreign aid package in at least two decades and takes its total support to Ukraine to $54bn. Earlier the Senate also confirmed Bridget Brink as the American ambassador to Ukraine, filling a post that had been vacant for three years.

China slashed a key interest rate for long-term loans in an attempt to revive its ailing property sector. The cut to the mortgage-reference rate was the largest in more than two years. Meanwhile loan growth in the country in April was at its lowest level in almost five years. Chinese and other Asian stockmarkets rose in response to the announcement.

Sri Lanka officially defaulted on its debt for the first time in its history on Thursday, after the country was unable to meet $78m of outstanding debt-interest payments within the requisite 30 days. It is trying to restructure debts of more than $50bn that it owes foreign creditors. Sri Lanka is in the midst of a political and economic crisis that has triggered violent protests against the government.

Oklahoma passed a law banning abortion except in cases of incest, rape or medical emergency. Like a law passed in Texas last year, it allows private citizens to sue anyone who has helped a woman get an abortion. If the governor signs it, as expected, it will go into effect immediately. The state has already passed a law banning abortions after about six weeks.

Monkeypox cases were detected in Britain, Portugal, Spain and America. The viral disease, which causes fever symptoms and a distinctive rash, is endemic in west and central Africa. The virus spreads through close contact and was first discovered in 1958 in monkeys.

McDonald’s found a buyer for its 850 restaurants in Russia, three days after the American fast-food chain said it was leaving the country after more than 30 years. It did not disclose the price. The buyer, Alexander Govor, already runs 25 branches in Siberia and will operate the additional restaurants under a new brand and with a different menu.

Fact of the day: 1.6bn, the number of people who now cannot be sure of getting enough food to eat. 