The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 21, 2023

France’s government survived two no-confidence votes, ensuring that President Emmanuel Macron’s controversial pension reforms will become law. The votes were spurred by Mr Macron’s decision to push through the reforms—which raise the retirement age from 62 to 64—without parliamentary approval. Some opposition lawmakers are calling for the government to resign or call a referendum on the pension measures.

The share price of First Republic, a mid-sized American bank, nearly halved on Monday. The Wall Street Journal reported that JPMorgan Chase’s boss is talking with other bank chiefs about an investment, given that their move to deposit $30bn in the troubled lender last week failed to calm anxiety. By one analyst’s estimate First Republic has a $13.5bn hole on its balance sheet.

Xi Jinping, China’s president, arrived in Moscow where he will begin talks with Vladimir Putin, his Russian counterpart. Mr Xi said that he hoped his visit would give “new momentum” to the “stable development” of relations between the two countries. Meanwhile a Ukrainian spokesperson said that his government expects China to “use its influence on Moscow” to end the war in Ukraine.

The IMF approved a $3bn bailout for Sri Lanka, which has been in economic crisis after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, combined with government mismanagement, created severe shortages and high inflation. The loan will be issued in nine tranches, with each successive one conditional on Sri Lanka’s adoption of reforms, including a restructuring of its reported $95bn-worth of public debt.

Amazon said it would cut 9,000 jobs, or 3% of its corporate workforce, having already announced 18,000 layoffs in January. The cuts will mostly affect employees in the company’s cloud computing unit, Amazon Web Services. Andy Jassy, Amazon’s boss, said that the “uncertain economy” has forced the tech giant to be “more streamlined” in its costs and headcount.

The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change published its sixth assessment report, declaring that global temperatures are “more likely than not” to climb to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. The report clarified that governments can still act to mitigate against the damages inflicted by extreme weather patterns. António Guterres, the UN secretary-general, called for “climate action on all fronts.”

The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation extended the bidding window for Silicon Valley Bank, which collapsed earlier this month. The FDIC said it had received “substantial interest” from potential buyers but that it and bidders need “more time” to “explore all options”. It will allow bidders to put down separate offers for different units of the bank, signalling a potential breakup solution.

Fact of the day: 12.8%, the percentage by which Chinese exports to Russia increased in 2022. Read the full story.


PHOTO: EPA
Tremors in the banking system
Following another week of turmoil in global banking, UBS, a Swiss bank, announced on Sunday that it was acquiring Credit Suisse, its struggling Swiss rival, in a rescue deal that valued the latter at around SFr3bn ($3.2bn). As part of the deal, holders of Credit Suisse’s “additional Tier-1” bonds—a type of debt designed to absorb losses when a bank fails—were wiped out. This controversial move is reverberating through the market for similar debt, worth $275bn, as investors revise their expectations of what might happen in the unlikely event of another bank failure.

The enlarged UBS will now begin a knotty integration process with Credit Suisse. The new mega-bank will hold nearly one-third of the Swiss market and manage $3.4trn through its wealth-management division. The combined investment-banking business will see brutal cost-cutting in coming months, much of it inflicted on traders and dealmakers from Credit Suisse. Financial policymakers around the world will be fervently hoping the new union succeeds.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Donald Trump faces indictment
After years of unabated scandal, a pay-off to a porn actress may yield the first criminal charges against Donald Trump. For weeks a grand jury in Manhattan has been hearing evidence that America’s former president falsified business records to hide hush money paid to Stormy Daniels (née Stephanie Clifford), whom he allegedly slept with in 2006. A vote to indict him, which appears imminent, would cue the indignities of arrest: mugshot, finger-printing and a not-guilty plea.

The case is far from straightforward. To classify the allegedly fraudulent record-keeping as a felony, rather than a mere misdemeanour, prosecutors must prove that it facilitated a second crime, of falsifying campaign expenses. But the Federal Election Commission, a regulator, dropped its civil probe into that matter because of partisan deadlock among commissioners. And the prosecutors’ star witness—Michael Cohen, Mr Trump’s former lawyer—is himself a convicted felon. The outcome of any case is unpredictable but its place in the history books is assured.


PHOTO: AFP
An election for Wisconsin’s Supreme Court
On Tuesday two candidates for an open seat on Wisconsin’s Supreme Court will debate in Madison, the state’s capital. The election is being closely watched. At stake is a liberal or conservative majority on the highest legal authority in one of America’s closest swing states. Wisconsin’s governor and one of its two senators are Democrats. But thanks to gerrymandering, Republicans dominate lower-level races and are just one seat short of a supermajority in the state senate.

The contest in the Supreme Court could shift the balance in Wisconsin’s politics. If Janet Protasiewicz, a liberal judge, wins, the court may be able to overturn an archaic state law banning abortion. And it could compel the state to undo some of the gerrymandering devised by the Republican-dominated state house. Victory for her opponent, Daniel Kelly, would maintain conservative control over the court, which has held since 2008.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Europe’s construction sector holds on
If there were a contest for the sector hardest hit by inflation and high interest rates, it would be a crowded field. Banks are currently in the lead, but construction firms could also be a solid bet. For them, higher rates means less demand from would-be house buyers. And higher prices for construction materials and energy shrink their margins.

So far, however, Europe’s construction sector is holding up. New figures released on Tuesday are likely to show a rebound in January from a very weak December, when production in the euro area fell 2.5% in comparison with the previous month in seasonally adjusted terms. And surveys of construction managers suggest that the sector’s overall confidence, while falling, is still higher than its average over the last twenty years or so.

Yet the number of new construction projects given the go-ahead is a cause for concern. In Germany, for instance, building permits issued for family dwellings fell by 26% in January compared with the year before. Europe’s builders will hope not to rival the continent’s banks for top spot anytime soon.


PHOTO: AP
A global baseball prize
America is the ancestral home of baseball. Yet curiously it has won the game’s international tournament— the World Baseball Classic, or, between 1938 and 2011, the Baseball World Cup—only five times in 43 attempts. American stars routinely skip the tournament as the risks of injury or suffering a humiliating loss outweigh the rewards; most of their fans care more about the domestic competition, Major League Baseball.

Yet the American team for this year’s competition, which concludes with the final on Tuesday, is strong. Mike Trout and Mookie Betts, two generational talents, are in the squad and will play in the final, when America will take on either Japan or Mexico (they will play their semi-final in Miami on Monday evening). America’s general manager, Tony Reagins, said that securing Mr Trout’s participation made recruiting other players easier. A win would bring America its second successive title. That would make recruitment for the next edition, in 2026, much easier.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Tuesday: Which Mexican revolutionary general became governor of Chihuahua but was assassinated in 1923?

Monday: Which site in St Petersburg was the official residence of the Tsar and was stormed by revolutionaries in 1917?

Until the lions have their own historians, the history of the hunt will always glorify the hunter.

Chinua Achebe
