The world in brief
June 21, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Hunter Biden, the son of America’s president, will plead guilty to two counts of wilful failure to pay federal income tax. Mr Biden has agreed to probation, according to a court filing. He will also be charged, but not prosecuted, for having lied about his extensive use of illegal drugs on a background-check form to buy a gun in 2018. Mr Biden’s lawyer released a statement calling the investigation “resolved”. Yet the saga will now hang over the re-election campaign of President Joe Biden, who has fiercely backed his scandal-ridden son.

The Paris 2024 Olympic committee said that it is “co-operating fully” with a police search of its offices. According to a spokesperson from France’s financial prosecutor’s office the investigation is related to two probes into possible corruption, in part linked to the awarding of contracts. The committee is in its final stages of planning, with events set to begin next summer.

The European Commission proposed adding €66bn ($72bn) to its seven-year budget, with €50bn earmarked to support Ukraine until 2027. €15bn will be used to tackle rising migration. The EU’s executive arm is seeking to reduce its economic exposure to rivals. A related plan, unveiled on Tuesday, would increase funding for emerging technologies, such as artificial intelligence and renewable energy.

America’s coast guard said that, as of 5.30pm GMT on Tuesday, the Titan submersible has 40 hours of oxygen left. A remotely operated vessel is searching near its last known location. OceanGate Expeditions, the tour operator, confirmed that five people were on board, including its boss, Stockton Rush; Hamish Harding, a British billionaire; and Shahzada Dawood, a Pakistani businessman.

Two men were convicted by a jury in Brooklyn on charges stemming from their harassment, as foreign agents of China’s government, of a Chinese citizen in New Jersey. The defendants—one of whom is a private investigator from New Jersey—are the first to be tried in a series of prosecutions in America over China’s efforts to pressure its citizens to repatriate.

Carlos Ghosn, a former chairman of Nissan, filed a $1bn lawsuit against the Japanese car giant. The claim, which was filed in May to Lebanon’s public prosecutors, accuses Nissan of “fabricating charges” against Mr Ghosn. The tycoon was arrested in Japan in 2018 on charges of financial misconduct, which he denied. He later fled to Lebanon hidden in a box on a private jet.

Estonia’s parliament approved legislation that will legalise same-sex marriage by 2024, making it the first ex-Soviet state to do so. The country first allowed civil partnerships in 2014. The far-right opposition had fiercely resisted the new legislation, saying it was against the traditional family model. Kaja Kallas, the prime minister, called it a “historic decision” that would allow Estonians to “love freely”.

Figure of the day: 8%, the proportion by which bilateral aid to sub-Saharan Africa fell in real terms in 2022. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
Hunter Biden gets a deal
This week Hunter Biden, the American president’s famously troubled son, will appear in federal court in Delaware. On Tuesday Mr Biden reached a deal with prosecutors: he will plead guilty to two misdemeanours over his failure to pay more than $200,000 in taxes between 2017 and 2018, and serve a two-year probation for allegedly lying about his drug use on a background-check form when purchasing a gun. He will probably not serve prison time.

Donald Trump, who faces his own federal indictment, likened Mr Biden’s punishment to a “traffic ticket”. Prosecutors, he complained, had underhandedly “cleared everything up”. Indeed many Republicans have accused Hunter and Joe Biden of evading charges for corruption, alleging that they took bribes from foreigners in exchange for policy concessions.

Republicans have failed to substantiate those claims, though they are still trying. Instead their probe has revealed how Hunter Biden capitalised on his father’s name. That may be unseemly, but it is not illegal.


PHOTO: AP
The cost of rebuilding Ukraine
Russia’s war against Ukraine has devastated infrastructure, industry and housing. The World Bank estimates the cost of repairing the damage to be at least $411bn. On Wednesday a two-day conference in London will begin to discuss how to raise that money and how to spend it.

Delegates include diplomats from Ukraine and its allies, as well as big donors, multilateral financial institutions, businesses and civil-society groups. Ukraine wants the West to use frozen Russian funds to pay for reconstruction. Some in the room will be worried about corruption when massive donations are made.

One question is how much more detail Ukraine’s government can add to its previous plan, presented last July. Ukraine wants to “build back better”, raising infrastructure standards in line with the EU. But exactly where it rebuilds depends on how much territory it can reclaim from Russia. Meanwhile war damage, including the ecologically disastrous destruction of the Kakhovka dam, continues to mount.



PHOTO: AP
Modi’s International Yoga Day
Narendra Modi will mark International Yoga Day on Wednesday by leading a mass session at the UN headquarters in New York. The annual celebration is a UN initiative that was launched, at the Indian prime minister’s urging, in 2015, the year after he came to power.

Critics of Mr Modi’s Hindu-nationalist agenda have treated his yoga evangelism with suspicion, given the practice’s Hindu origins. “Om”—a yoga chant—is considered a sacred sound in Hindu scripture. The Sun Salutation, a common set of yoga poses, is associated with Hindu prayer. Others note that yoga’s popularity in the West, which Yoga Day is intended to reinforce, is positive and culturally inclusive.

Mr Modi, who urges practising yoga daily, appears to have been mainly motivated to underline the activity’s association with India. It is one of the many examples of the prime minister’s flair for branding and marketing—of his country and himself.


PHOTO: AFP
Britain’s stubborn inflation troubles
Figures due on Wednesday will probably show that Britain’s annual rate of consumer-price inflation fell again in May, from April’s 8.7%. But on Thursday the Bank of England will all but certainly raise its benchmark interest rate, currently 4.5%, for the 13th consecutive meeting. Inflation in Britain is not only the highest in the G7 but looking worryingly persistent. The “core” measure (excluding food, energy, alcohol and tobacco) rose unexpectedly in April. In a still-tight labour market, wage growth has picked up.

Fretful markets have priced in higher rates. Two-year gilt yields are above the peak that followed last autumn’s catastrophic mini-budget, and this week briefly topped 5%. Mortgage-holders whose fixed-rate deals are ending face eye-watering increases: the average two-year rate now exceeds 6%, reports Moneyfacts, a data provider, against 2.59% in June 2021. The central bank seems baffled. Having been too optimistic about inflation, it is commissioning an external review of its forecasting. Its 2% target seems far off.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Where are Glastonbury’s female headliners?
Too few showers mean many revellers at the Glastonbury Festival, which is Britain's largest and begins on Wednesday, will be stale, pale and male. But they do not expect the same of the acts. Emily Eavis, the organiser, aspires to fill half of the lineup with female artists. She also consciously books acts from a range of genres and ethnic backgrounds. But when it comes to picking headliners, she says that is difficult.

The star acts this year—Arctic Monkeys, Elton John and Guns n’ Roses—are all white men who are veterans of the music business. The industry has a “pipeline” problem, Ms Eavis argues, with too few female-fronted acts getting the investment or radio airplay needed to become headliners. Others argue that Lizzo, a black female pop star who will perform before Guns n’ Roses, could have had their slot. But the problem goes beyond Glastonbury. According to Sky News across 104 British festivals this summer, only a fifth of headline acts are fronted by women.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which Thomas Hardy novel features the characters Diggory Venn and Thomasin Yeobright?

Tuesday: Which famous comedian and film star died at the age of 100 in 2003?

Politics have no relation to morals.

Niccolo Machiavelli
