The world in brief
August 19, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

America, Japan and South Korea agreed to greater military cooperation at the first-ever standalone summit between the three countries’ leaders at Camp David. In addition to holding high-level meetings every year, they will host joint military exercises and share intelligence more readily. President Joe Biden said the pact, which came during a period of rapprochement between South Korea and Japan, “made history”.

China’s securities regulator unveiled reforms designed to revive flagging economic growth, which has been weighing on the country’s stockmarket. Proposed measures include cutting trading fees and encouraging state-run and large listed firms to boost mergers and acquisitions. China’s benchmark CSI 300 index is down over 2% this year, whereas America’s S&P 500 has risen over 14%.

Seven top commanders in Brasilia’s military police were arrested for allegedly aiding the insurrectionists who stormed Brazil’s capital on January 8th, protesting against Jair Bolsonaro’s election defeat. The commanders allegedly knew that some supporters of the ousted president planned to invade government buildings and failed to stop them. The officers have not yet been charged.

Vigilante “self-defence” groups have lynched over 350 people, mostly alleged gang-members, in Haiti since late April, a UN spokesperson said. The groups formed in response to ongoing gang violence; more than 2,400 people have been killed and nearly 1,000 kidnapped this year. The UN’s secretary-general has urged the global community to send a police and military force to Haiti to restore security.

Sebastian Kurz, a former Austrian chancellor, was charged on suspicion of making false statements during a government inquiry into the “Ibiza Scandal”. In 2019 a leaked video showed Heinz-Christian Strache, then vice-chancellor, offering public contracts for party donations to someone posing as a Russian oligarch’s niece. The ensuing saga toppled Mr Kurz, who resigned in October 2021. His trial begins in October.

The top emergency management official in Maui resigned, citing health reasons. Herman Andaya, who had no previous experience in emergency management, had been criticised for not sounding disaster sirens during devastating wildfires on the Hawaiian island last week. At least 111 people have died, with over 1,000 still unaccounted for, making it the deadliest American blaze in over 100 years.

Russia said it shot down a Ukrainian drone in central Moscow. The drone then smashed into a building, scattering debris in the city’s business district and disrupting air traffic at civilian airports. Ukraine has not claimed responsibility. Moscow’s air defences are among the best in the world, but many drones have slipped its radars in recent months.

Word of the week: Schuldenbremse, or “debt brake”, which bars Germany’s federal government from net borrowing of more than 0.35% of GDP. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ukraine’s steady progress
Ukrainian ground forces are making steady gains. Earlier this week they liberated Urozhaine on the Zaporizhia-Donetsk border and moved closer to taking control of Robotyne in the Zaporizhia region. But Russia stepped up its attempts to hit Ukrainian targets up to 1,000km behind the front line, too, striking a military airfield in addition to destroying swathes of civilian infrastructure.

Ukrainian officials say that Russia is concerned about the success of Ukraine’s “deep battle” campaign (attacks on enemy forces well to the rear) and particularly the ability of British- and French-made Storm Shadow/SCALP cruise missiles to take out logistics hubs and command centres.

Russia is trying to destroy the aircraft that launch these missiles and disable their runways. Those efforts will only intensify if the German Chancellor, Olaf Scholz, yields to growing domestic political pressure to give Ukraine Taurus missiles. Those could reach precious targets in Crimea, including the Sevastopol naval base and the already damaged Kerch Bridge linking the peninsula to Russia.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Kidnappings of aid workers soar
Saturday is World Humanitarian Day, which recognises the sacrifices of aid workers. Last year the number of attacks on them declined slightly to 235 from 268 in 2021, according to the Aid Worker Security Database. The number of deaths fell to 444 from 461. But the number of kidnappings jumped by nearly 60% to 185. That is the highest figure ever recorded.

The increase is largely driven by the kidnapping of 39 aid workers in Ukraine, a new entry to the list of most dangerous countries. Humanitarian workers say that the Russian army, which invaded in February 2022, has targeted them. South Sudan remains the most dangerous place in the world for aid workers overall. Last year there were 45 attacks on them, primarily shootings; 23 were killed. Some other countries are becoming more perilous, too. In Sudan, after a civil conflict broke out in April this year, instances of violence against aid workers were nearly twice as high as in all of 2022, preliminary data for 2023 show.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Racing for a world record
The biennial World Championships is the second-most-prestigious competition in athletics (after the Olympics). The men’s 200m dash is one of its highlights. Usain Bolt, a retired Jamaican star, has run six of the 20 fastest times in the event. American Noah Lyles, now the world’s fastest runner at that distance, has run seven. But Mr Bolt holds the world record of 19.19 seconds. At the championships in Budapest, which start on Saturday, Mr Lyles will try to outdo him.

He is the favourite to win what would be his third consecutive gold medal in that event. But he must improve his personal best by 0.13 seconds to surpass Mr Bolt. That he will race against an especially strong group of runners will probably help him. But Mr Lyles has put extra pressure on himself in this year’s competition. For the first time he is also competing in the 100m, where his personal best of 9.86 seconds is not even among the quickest 130 sprints in history.


PHOTO: MINAMATA MANDALA
Minamata’s decades-long battle in Japan
In the 1950s Minamata, a coastal village in south-western Japan, became the epicentre of a disease caused by toxic methylmercury, which a chemical company had dumped into the sea. Thousands of people were disfigured or paralysed. Their families continue to fight the government, which failed to stop the leak. They want recognition and compensation. In “Minamata Mandala”, a six-hour documentary released in Japan in 2021, they tell their stories. On Saturday the Anthology Film Archives in New York will screen it.

“Minamata”, a Hollywood film starring Johnny Depp as Eugene Smith, a photojournalist who visited the town in the 1970s, helped revive memories of the calamity when it was released in 2021. But “Minamata Mandala” tells the story better. Hara Kazuo, the director, spent 15 years filming the victims. Instead of focusing on a Western protagonist, Mr Hara offers a vivid, heartbreaking portrait of the lives of the villagers. “I want to agitate the audience,” the director says, because “the issue is far from over.”


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Sarina Wiegman, England’s greatest manager
When England won the football World Cup in 1966, few fans imagined that the country would have to wait nearly 60 years for another, or that the women’s team would be the one to claim it. Yet it is the Lionesses who are now one match away from a football World Cup championship. On Sunday they face Spain in the final. Perhaps the most important reason for England’s success is Sarina Wiegman, a Dutchwoman who has coached England for barely three years. She may already be the greatest manager of any England football team, male or female.

Under Ms Wiegman’s stewardship, the Lionesses have lost just once in 38 matches. That run includes victory at the European Championship in 2022 (a trophy that has consistently eluded the men’s team). Ms Wiegman’s win record of 79% is higher than the 62% of Gareth Southgate, the current men’s coach, and the 61% of Sir Alf Ramsey, who led England in 1966. That is no fluke: before managing England, she led the Dutch women to a European Championship victory in 2017, and then to the World Cup final in 2019 (which ended in a loss to America).

Ms Wiegman has many strengths. She is meticulous, diligent and empowers her players. She knows when to be maternal, and when to be tough. If her demeanour on the sidelines resembles that of a physical-education teacher, that is because she was one. To supplement her paltry income as a player in the Netherlands, she taught at a school.

Nowadays women players can earn a living wage without doing extra jobs. Still, management remains a man’s domain. Only 12 of the 32 managers at this year’s women’s World Cup were women. But such disparities never discouraged Ms Wiegman. She grew up in more unequal times. As a child in the Hague she cut her hair to join boys’ kickabouts. Now such disguises are scarcely needed. In fact, the boys are asking her to play: many fans want Ms Wiegman to manage England men next.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Space to manoeuvre around low gorge rim (7, 4)

1 across One way to send messages—even sweet talk (6)

2 across Unbounded alarm across United Nations, related to the moon (5)

3 across Out loud, contemplate bold hairstyle (6)

Factual clues

1 down What Britain’s post-Brexit internal market has less of than Europe’s (7, 4)

1 across A Chinese super-app (6)

2 across A type of ice that both India and Russia are currently racing to find (5)

3 across A hairdo enjoying a renaissance in America (6)



The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Caio Priszculnik, São Paulo, Brazil

Eckart Neumann, Hannover, Germany

Karen Roach, Grenada, Mississippi, America

They all gave the correct answers of Phoebe Waller-Bridge, Rachel Whiteread, joey, Ross ice shelf and ship chandler. The theme is characters in Friends: Phoebe, Rachel, Joey, Ross and Chandler.

The questions were:

Monday: Which British actor created the comedy “Fleabag”?

Tuesday: Which sculptor, the first woman to win the Turner prize, is best known for her cast of the inside of a terraced house?

Wednesday: What is the name for a baby kangaroo?

Thursday: What is the largest ice shelf in Antarctica, at almost 500,000 square kilometres?

Friday: What is the term for people who sell supplies and equipment for ships?

We first make our habits, and then our habits make us.

John Dryden
