The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (21:00 GMT+1 / 04:00 Hong Kong)

Consumer prices in America in May were 8.6% higher than a year earlier, the fastest inflation rate in more than four decades, up from an annual pace of 8.3% in April. Prices rose by 1% in May alone and the “core” index (which strips out food and energy) by 0.6%. Stocks fell and bond yields rose amid speculation that the Federal Reserve might raise interest rates further or faster as a result.

The congressional committee investigating the attack on America’s Capitol on January 6th last year by supporters of Donald Trump set out to prove that it was part of an “attempted coup”. The first of six televised hearings used audio recordings, video footage and live testimony. It included reports that the president had spoken approvingly of the mob’s chants to “hang Mike Pence”, his vice-president.

America will drop its requirement that people arriving by air first test negative for covid-19 from Sunday. Airlines have long lobbied the government for the change, saying many Americans were being put off international travel by the prospect of testing positive and being stuck abroad. IATA, the world's biggest airline trade group, said it was “great news”.

The head of the UN’s humanitarian office, OCHA, said that Sri Lanka could be on the brink of a “full-blown humanitarian emergency” as the country grapples with its worst economic crisis since independence in 1948. Sri Lanka defaulted on its debt for the first time in May. On Thursday the UN promised the country $47m in emergency assistance.

The president of the European Union’s parliament said the institution stood “fully behind” Ukraine’s bid to become a candidate for joining the EU. Roberta Metsola was speaking at the Copenhagen Democracy Summit, on a day devoted to a discussion on how to “defend Ukraine, counter authoritarian powers, and build an alliance of democracies.”

Truckers in South Korea threatened to disrupt semiconductor production as part of their ongoing protest over pay and freight rates. A strike, now into its fourth day, has already disrupted activity at several ports. On Thursday an action at Hyundai Motor’s biggest factory cut production in half. South Korea’s government said it would remain neutral in the dispute.

NASA, America’s space agency, said it will launch a nine-month study of UFOs or, beg pardon, “UAPs”: unidentified aerial phenomena. Whether caused by Martian flying saucers or something more mundane, the boffins intend to study such data with an open mind, reasoning that any results may prove useful. Last summer the Pentagon came clean about 16 years of its pilots’ sightings.

Phrase of the week: the Octopus Doctrine, as described by Naftali Bennett, Israel’s prime minister, discussing his approach towards Iran. We no longer play with the tentacles, with Iran’s proxies: we’ve created a new equation by going for the head.” Read the full article.

A possible gun deal has momentum

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
After a deluge of mass shootings, many Americans are fed up. On Saturday tens of thousands are expected to attend at least 450 March for Our Lives gun-reform demonstrations across the country and beyond. Organisers expect as many as 100,000 to march at the rally in Washington, DC. America has seen at least 254 mass shootings this year, notably at a supermarket in Buffalo, where a white supremacist targeted African-Americans, and in Uvalde, Texas, where a gunman killed 19 children and two teachers at a primary school.

The anger may yield political results. A sweeping gun reform bill passed by the House of Representatives on June 8th will probably falter in the Senate, but negotiations for a more modest bipartisan Senate bill look promising. The model may be Florida, which changed its laws after a school shooting in 2018. A so-called “red flag” law there prevents dangerous people from accessing guns, and limits the purchase of some firearms to under-21s. That will not end gun violence—but it could help.

A raucous election in Alaska

PHOTO: EYEVINE
Alaska has been a state for just 63 years. For 49 of them its sole congressional seat was held by Don Young, before he died in March. Nearly 50 candidates have filed to run in the primary election to fill the remainder of his term. The vote will be held on Saturday.

The candidates include Josh Revak, a state senator endorsed by Mr Young’s widow, and a man called Santa Claus. A better-known aspirant is Sarah Palin, a former governor who served, notoriously, as John McCain’s running-mate in the 2008 presidential race. But although she enjoys the endorsement of Donald Trump, Ms Palin may struggle to convince Alaskans she is serious. A recent television appearance saw her rapping while dressed as a bear.

In August the four candidates who win the most votes will compete to determine who completes Young’s term, which runs until January. A separate primary and then, finally, a general election this November will be needed to decide who will occupy the seat after that. Alaskans could be forgiven if they are confused.

Football’s corruption scandal drags on

PHOTO: REUTERS
Sepp Blatter and Michel Platini were once the most powerful men in football. Mr Blatter was president of FIFA, the world governing body, from 1998 until 2015. Mr Platini, a former captain of the French national team, ran UEFA, FIFA’s European subsidiary, from 2007 to 2016. Racked by allegations of corruption, the pair have since fallen from grace.

This week both men went on trial in Switzerland. Under the spotlight is a payment of 2m Swiss francs ($1.8m) made in 2011 from FIFA to Mr Platini, authorised by Mr Blatter. Both men say the payment was made to settle a “gentleman’s agreement” over Mr Platini’s salary. But prosecutors allege it was fraud and embezzlement—and, even if legitimate, was paid well after it should have been. If found guilty Mr Blatter and Mr Platini would join an inauspicious group of other convicted former football executives, many of whom faced charges relating to evidence found during a raid on FIFA’s headquarters in Zurich in 2015. Sometimes the beautiful game leaves behind an ugly mess.

Traffic noise might affect intelligence

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Arthur Schopenhauer called noise “the most impertinent of all interruptions.” Since the German philosopher was driven batty by the cracking of horsemen’s whips, one wonders how he would have managed in a cacophonous modern city. Not very well, if new research published in PLOS Medicine, a journal, is anything to go by.

In a study in Barcelona, nearly 3,000 children from 38 different primary schools were given a series of cognitive tests. The results were compared against recordings of road-traffic noise taken from their schools. They suggest that more traffic noise was linked to an impairment of cognitive development.

Average decibel readings were linked to worse outcomes. But the pupils’ cognition seems to have been more deeply affected by spikes in sound, such as cars honking horns or revving engines. Children exposed to more of those “noise events” suffered a slower development of memory and attentiveness, the tests showed. Noise regulations in cities are often based on average decibel levels rather than spikes. Rethinking that might serve children better.

Weekend Profile: The Gupta brothers

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ajay, Atul and Rajesh Gupta were not born in South Africa. But within 20 years of arriving they had allegedly pulled off one of the most remarkable corruption schemes in history. The three brothers stand accused of orchestrating a mind-boggling scam of “state capture” in the 2010s, in which at least 49bn rand ($3.2bn) in public money and contracts was apparently channelled into, or through, Gupta-linked firms—making the brothers fabulously wealthy. Last Monday Atul and Rajesh (pictured) were arrested in Dubai in relation to a case being pursued by South African authorities. (The Guptas have denied any wrongdoing, and described the allegations as politically motivated. Ajay has not been arrested.)

The trio grew up in Saharanpur, a sleepy town in northern India. Their father, a small-time businessman and trader, urged them to go out into the world to make their fortunes. Atul, the middle son, arrived in South Africa around the fall of apartheid, and began a business assembling cheap computers. Within a few years his brothers had joined him, and together they began to forge political connections in their adopted homeland. That soon paid off in the form of public contracts, such as one in 2002 to supply computers to government-run schools. They seemed quickly to settle on a modus operandi of pocketing cash while delivering little: journalists found that the computers did not work as promised.

Few friendships were as profitable for the Guptas as that with Jacob Zuma. The brothers met Mr Zuma in the early 2000s, when he was the country’s deputy president. The Guptas regularly invited Mr Zuma into their Johannesburg home, and employed his son as a director of some of their businesses. After winning the presidency in 2009 Mr Zuma repaid the favours in spades, ultimately handing over, in effect, the keys of state. The Guptas secured control of the boards of huge state-owned firms, including the electricity, rail and ports monopolies. Investigations by public watchdogs and a judge-led inquiry have reported that by around 2015 the Guptas were able to have cabinet ministers appointed and fired.

Yet the brothers seem to have made a fatal mistake. Most of the time bribe-payers follow an unwritten code: steal only as much as you can before attracting attention and getting caught. To the Guptas, this seemed to be just one more rule to be broken. Having left South Africa in 2016, two years before Mr Zuma stepped down, Atul and Rajesh—who now face a contentious extradition fight—may have an unhappy return.

Weekend crossword

Welcome to our new crossword, designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Factual clues

1 down Where Volodymyr Zelensky paid a visit on June 5th (10)

1 across City in Britain’s northern powerhouse (5)

2 across Established crop in Peru and Colombia; a newer one in Honduras and Venezuela (4)

3 across Home to the Medina bazaar neighbourhood (5)



Cryptic clues

1 down Classy, hunky but non-U, under attack in Donetsk (10)

1 across City’s on top, we hear? (5)

2 across Leaves when company about? (4)

3 across Lulu, baker back in part of capital (5)

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent in Friday's edition.


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. (And sincere apologies to readers who were sent an old question in Friday’s email newsletter.) The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Ahrum Kim, Bucheon, Republic of Korea

North America: Christian Hecimovic, Squamish, Canada

Central and South America: Michel Tanaka & Beatriz Fortes, Brasília, Brazil

Europe: Erik Mashkilleyson, Helsinki, Finland

Africa: Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya

Oceania: Ian Hamilton, Perth, Australia.

They all gave the correct answers of David Tennant, Earl Grey, Shirley Chisholm, Jane Fonda and “In the Heights”. The theme is novels by the Brontës: “The Tenant of Wildfell Hall”, “Agnes Grey”, “Shirley”, “Jane Eyre” and “Wuthering Heights”.

You can no more win a war than you can win an earthquake.

Jeannette Rankin
