The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 25, 2023

Germany is expected to announce the dispatch of its Leopard tanks to Ukraine on Wednesday, following much dithering and pressure from allies. America is similarly poised to send its Abrams tanks, according to a report in the Wall Street Journal. The U-turn, which will also allow Poland and other countries to export their German-made Leopards, comes after NATO talks in Berlin on Tuesday.

America’s justice department and eight states, including California and New York, sued Google, alleging that it illegally dominates the online-advertising market. They accused the tech giant of preventing publishers and advertisers from transacting over rival ad exchanges, among other anti-competitive practices. The lawsuit—the second federal antitrust case brought against Google—seeks to force the firm to divest several ad products.

Documents with classified markings from Mike Pence’s tenure as vice-president in the Trump administration were found at his Indiana home. His aides conducted the search last week, after news broke of President Joe Biden’s documents scandal. Mr Pence had been “unaware” of their presence, said his lawyer. American prosecutors are investigating both Donald Trump and Mr Biden for similar offences.

Microsoft’s quarterly revenues grew by 2% from the same period a year ago, to $52.7bn, while its profit, of $16.4bn, fell by 12%. Year-over-year revenue growth from Azure, the tech giant’s cloud offering, was 31%, a slowdown from the past two quarters. Sales decreased at parts of the business serving the consumer market, such as at Xbox, the video-game division.

Rupert Murdoch abandoned plans to reunite his two media companies, Fox Corporation and News Corporation. Shareholders had objected to the proposal, arguing that a merger would mask the value of News Corp, which owns the Wall Street Journal and The Times of London. (Fox Corp owns Fox News and other TV stations.) Mr Murdoch split the companies in 2013.

Former senior officials in Lebanon were charged with homicide and probable intent linked to the 2020 Beirut blast. Among the accused is Hassan Diab, who was prime minister at the time and resigned days after the disaster, which killed more than 200 people. Lebanese authorities had stalled the probe for a year.

“Everything Everywhere All At Once”, a maximalist metaverse action-comedy, led the Academy Awards nominations with 11 nods. Behind it were “The Banshees of Inisherin” and Netflix’s “All Quiet on the Western Front”, with nine each. Three Asian actors from “Everything Everywhere” were nominated, as was Hong Chau for “The Whale”, setting a yearly record for actors of Asian descent. The ceremony is on March 12th.

Fact of the day: 67%, the average adult literacy rate in sub-Saharan Africa, according to UNESCO, the UN’s cultural agency. Read the full story.

Ukraine will get Leopard tanks

Spinning a battle tank around on the spot is referred to by cavalry officers as a “180-degree pivot steer”. Germany is now doing something similar. On Wednesday morning, after days of dithering, Olaf Scholz’s government finally agreed to send 14 Leopard 2 tanks—a company’s worth—to Ukraine. Other countries will also be allowed to send their German-made ones, too. America may also grudgingly be sending about 30 of its M1 Abrams tanks, which could ease Mr Scholz’s angst.

The decision comes not a moment too soon. Western countries are rushing to build up Ukraine’s armoured forces for the next phase of the war, dispatching hundreds of armoured vehicles, including German ones. The omission of heavier main battle tanks—apart from 14 British Challenger 2 tanks—was glaring. The pity is that it took intense friendly fire, at home and abroad, to rattle Mr Scholz’s carapace hard enough to force him into a clanking Panzerwende.

Egypt’s unhappy anniversary

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Twelve years ago, when tens of thousands of Egyptians gathered in Tahrir Square in downtown Cairo to demand the removal of President Hosni Mubarak, they also chanted for food and freedom. Mr Mubarak resigned, but for many of Egypt’s 104m citizens life has become worse.

Egypt’s economy is in a dire state. With inflation pushing past 20% and the Egyptian pound tumbling to an all-time low against the dollar this month, food has become unaffordable for many. The price of chicken has more than doubled in the past year; eggs have become a luxury. And Egyptians are no closer to freedom. There are 65,000 political prisoners in Egyptian jails, significantly more than under Mr Mubarak. Many are held without trial and in miserable conditions.

Despite growing disillusionment with the government of Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, who has been in power since 2014, it is unlikely that protests similar to those in 2011 will break out soon. The cost of living is high, but the cost of dissent remains higher.

Tesla hits speed bumps

PHOTO: REUTERS
Tesla’s easy ride hit the skids last year. In 2022 America’s electric-vehicle champion lost 70% of its market value. In January the company missed market expectations for vehicle deliveries for the third quarter running; a growing gap between production and deliveries suggested sagging demand. Meanwhile Tesla’s mercurial boss, Elon Musk, seemed preoccupied with his new toy, Twitter. All that is likely to shine through in its quarterly results, which will be released on Wednesday.

But the world’s most valuable carmaker could yet stage a turnaround. To preserve market share Tesla has slashed prices, sacrificing an estimated $7bn in profits this year. In America, its basic models are now cheap enough to qualify for new government subsidies for domestic EVs that cost less than $55,000. And the growing availability of cheaper EVs—made by both established competitors and startups inspired by Tesla—may help build a new customer base for the firm’s pricier models, especially in China.


New Zealand’s new prime minister

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Chris Hipkins was sworn in as New Zealand’s prime minister on Wednesday, less than a week after the surprise resignation of Jacinda Ardern. An ally of Ms Ardern, Mr Hipkins is something of a political utility man. Most recently minister of education and police, he has also served as health minister, from where he oversaw New Zealand’s stringent response to covid-19. Mr Hipkins was the only candidate for the premiership nominated by his Labour Party.

Outside party ranks, Mr Hipkins faces a bumpier ride. Labour is trailing the opposition National Party in polls as the cost of living spirals. He says he will tackle the “pandemic of inflation” and make “the tax system fairer”. He may also claw back support by ditching unpopular reforms pushed by Ms Ardern, including an expensive merger between the national television and radio broadcasters. If all that fails, Mr Hipkins’s term could be brief—New Zealand goes to the polls in October.

Russia and the downing of MH17

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
In November a Dutch court convicted two Russians and a Ukrainian separatist (in absentia) for shooting down Malaysian Airlines flight MH17 over Ukraine in 2014, killing 298 mainly Dutch passengers and crew. On Wednesday the European Court of Human Rights decided to hear a case charging the Russian state itself with responsibility for the attack. The case, brought by the Netherlands and Ukraine, hinges on whether Russia exercised control over the forces of the Donetsk People’s Republic (DNR).

Russia says the separatist mini-state in eastern Ukraine acted alone. That seems less plausible since the separatist states obediently let Russia annex them after invading Ukraine last year. In its November ruling the Dutch court determined that Russia had “overall control” over the DNR, and was thus involved in downing MH17, after hearing evidence such as an intercept of the DNR’s then-prime minister phoning Moscow and asking to speak to “the boss”.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which kids TV show featured International Rescue, an organisation run by the Tracy family?

Tuesday: What name for a gentle breeze derives from that of a Greek god?

Suspense is worse than disappointment.

Robert Burns
