The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (04:16 GMT+1 / 11:16 Hong Kong)

Brazil’s presidential election will go to a run-off after Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a leftist former president, won the first round on Sunday but failed to secure enough of a majority for an outright victory. Jair Bolsonaro, the populist right-wing incumbent, outperformed pollsters’ expectations, taking 43% of the vote to Lula’s 48%. The next round will take place on October 30th.

Russian troops retreated from Lyman, a key logistics hub in Donetsk, hours after Ukrainian forces entered the city. Ukraine said the recapture would allow its military to advance into Luhansk, a region Russia took over in July. The retreat comes after Vladimir Putin’s illegal annexation of four regions of Ukraine, including Donetsk and Luhansk. Ramzan Kadyrov, the leader of Chechnya, a southern Russian region, urged Mr Putin to take “more drastic measures”, including “the use of low-yield nuclear weapons”.

Protests in Iran continued across the country on Sunday. Security forces clashed with students at a university in Tehran, the capital. The demonstrations were prompted a fortnight ago by the murder of a young woman arrested for not covering all her hair. They have since spiralled into the biggest threat to the ayatollahs’ dictatorial rule for many years.

The death toll from Hurricane Ian rose further. Nearly 80 people have died in Florida, while four deaths have been reported in North Carolina so far. Thousands of Americans remain without power and rescue operations in some coastal communities are still ongoing. President Joe Biden will visit Puerto Rico and Florida this week to survey the damage there.

The Indonesian authorities said that at least 125 people had been killed and 320 injured in a stampede after a football match in Indonesia. Earlier, local officials had put the deal toll at 174. Supporters of Arema FC, a club from Malang, East Java, rushed onto the pitch after their team lost to regional rivals, Persebaya Surabaya. Local police retaliated with tear gas which triggered a stampede, according to the region’s police chief. Fixtures in the league have been suspended until an investigation is completed.

A landmark Chinese #MeToo case was settled on the eve of a highly anticipated court hearing in the American state of Minnesota. A Chinese student, Liu Jingyao, had accused Liu Qiangdong (no relation), the billionaire founder of JD.com, China’s biggest online retailer, of sexually assaulting her in 2018 when she was a student at the University of Minnesota. The two parties’ lawyers said that the incident that took place had “resulted in a misunderstanding”.

Tesla delivered almost 344,000 vehicles globally in the third quarter, a record for the American electric-car maker. The total came in under the 358,000 deliveries that analysts had expected, according to Bloomberg. Tesla said in a statement that logistical challenges were to blame.

The Ukrainian answer to annexation

PHOTO: AFP
“The people of Donetsk…are becoming our citizens forever”, boasted Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, as he annexed large chunks of Ukraine on Friday. A day later Ukraine’s army exposed the hollowness of that claim by recapturing a key city in the province. Lyman was “fully cleared” of Russian troops shortly after midday on Sunday, said Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, in a video message.

Russia, naturally, refused to acknowledge the retreat, describing it euphemistically as a move to “more advantageous positions”. Its troops are thought to be establishing a new defensive line in the east, running from Troitske in the north to Svatove in the south. Despite Mr Putin’s threats to use nuclear weapons to protect Russian territory—including the newly annexed provinces—Ukraine’s army shows no sign of stopping its advance. Its next target may be Kreminna, a town which lies 17 miles (30 km) east of Lyman. “There were more Ukrainian flags in the Donbas this week,” noted Mr Zelensky. “There will be even more next week.”


Liz Truss’s party conference from hell

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Conservative Party’s annual conference begins in earnest on Monday. It ought to have been a victory lap for Liz Truss, who was elected the new leader barely a month ago. Instead, Britain’s prime minister is engulfed in recriminations after a bungled mini-budget spooked investors. The party’s popularity has consequently imploded: a succession of polls show that the opposition Labour Party has opened leads in excess of 20 points over the Tories. Ms Truss’s disapproval rating is worse even than her predecessor Boris Johnson at his lowest, according to Opinium, a pollster.

Dismay over Mr Truss’s mini-budget surfaced again on Sunday. Michael Gove, a veteran former minister, declared her tax cuts for high earners risky and “a display of the wrong values”. Far from a dynamic fresh start, Ms Truss’s premiership looks like a continuation of the gridlock and infighting that has characterised all Tory governments in Britain since the Brexit vote of 2016.


The Supreme Court back in action

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Monday America’s justices—including a new jurist, Ketanji Brown Jackson—return to the bench. The term ahead could be as seismic as the last, when the Supreme Court revolutionised the law on guns, religion, environmental regulation and, most notoriously, abortion.

The first oral argument, a dispute over the reach of the Clean Water Act, pits a couple wanting to build a home near a lake in Idaho against the Environmental Protection Agency. Other cases will touch on flashpoints in American politics. On Tuesday, the court asks whether Alabama’s congressional map, which two lower courts found to be racially discriminatory, violates section two of the Voting Rights Act. On October 31st the court reconsiders its 44-year-old precedent permitting the consideration of race in university admissions. And later in the autumn state constitutional limits on partisan gerrymandering will be on the chopping block, and a website designer will argue she has a free-speech right (Colorado’s anti-discrimination law notwithstanding) to make websites for straight, but not gay, weddings. Nothing too controversial, then.

Japanese politics and the ghost of Abe Shinzo

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The ghost of Abe Shinzo continues to haunt his successor’s government. Last week’s state funeral for the slain former prime minister was unpopular owing to Abe’s controversial legacy, including his attempts to revise the pacifist constitution. Kishida Fumio’s approval ratings sagged the longer he defended it. On Monday Mr Kishida faces another ruckus; an extraordinary parliamentary session during which the opposition will probe the ruling Liberal Democratic Party’s links with the Unification Church, a cult-like religious group.

Abe’s assassination uncovered links between the LDP and the church, to which Abe himself was connected. The killer’s mother had joined the church, donating large sums of money until his family went bankrupt. An internal survey conducted by the LDP in late August revealed that nearly half of its 379 lawmakers had links to the church, from receiving campaign support to attending its events. For Mr Kishida’s part, he will try to use the session to refocus attention on his signature “New Capitalism” agenda.

Building the human placenta on a microchip

PHOTO: AFP
The placenta bonds mother and baby, and exists only in gestation. The temporary organ gives the fetus nutrition and oxygen, while shielding it from infection. But it can also play a role in infants’ deaths. Placental malaria, for instance, kills 200,000 newborns and 10,000 mothers annually by clogging up placental blood vessels.

To better understand this pathology, researchers have developed the “placenta-on-a-chip”, described in the mid-September issue of the journal Scientific Reports. They cultured placental cells and umbilical cord cells on opposite ends of a microchip, to resemble the placental interface. They then incubated the chip, rocking it gently to push malaria-infected blood through it in both directions. Tests revealed that the flow of glucose was inhibited in the same way that would be expected in a real placenta. While not a perfect substitute, chips like this one could finally reveal the mysteries of the placenta and protect it from diseases and harmful drugs, just as it protected each of us.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Which device for protecting buildings is generally held to have been invented by Benjamin Franklin?

Have nothing in your houses that you do not know to be useful, or believe to be beautiful”.

William Morris
