Skip to content
Menu
Weekly edition
Search
The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (04:31 GMT / 12:31 Hong Kong)

Several news outlets reported that Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, plans to visit Washington on Wednesday, to address Congress and meet Joe Biden, his American counterpart. It would mark his first known foreign trip since the war’s start, though it reportedly may be called off owing to security concerns. American lawmakers are preparing to pass a $1.7trn spending bill that contains $45bn in additional assistance to Ukraine and NATO.

On Tuesday Mr Zelensky made a surprise visit to Bakhmut, a tiny town in eastern Ukraine that Russia has been attempting to seize for months. Vladimir Putin admitted that the situation in the four regions of Ukraine that his country claimed to have annexed in September is “extremely difficult”. Meanwhile, the Kremlin moved to shut down the Moscow Helsinki Group, one of Russia’s most prominent human-rights organisations.

Wells Fargo agreed to a $3.7bn settlement with America’s Consumer Financial Protection Bureau over mismanagement tied to mortgages and loans. The CFPB ordered America’s fourth-largest bank to pay $2bn to redress harm done to customers and fined the bank $1.7bn—a record amount. Wells Fargo has been scandal-stricken since 2016, when it emerged that it had opened fraudulent customer accounts.

China said it would limit its official tally of covid-19 deaths to those who tested positive for the virus and died from respiratory failure. The definition is narrower than the previous standard, which included anyone who died after testing positive. As the virus spreads throughout the country, just five covid fatalities were reported on Tuesday; the true number is likely to be far higher.

The Taliban barred women from attending university in Afghanistan. The edict, issued in a letter by the higher-education minister, adds to the many schooling-related obstacles the Taliban have imposed on Afghan women since regaining power in 2021. They in effect banned girls from secondary school after taking over, and in October severely restricted the subjects women could study at university.

Mexico granted asylum to family members of Peru’s former president, Pedro Castillo, who faces prosecution for his attempt to dissolve the legislature. Mexico did not say which of his relatives or how many had sought refuge at its embassy in Lima. Several, including his wife, are being investigated for corruption. Mexico’s president continues to acknowledge Mr Castillo, a fellow leftist, as Peru’s rightful leader.

EU regulators will open an investigation into a planned $61bn takeover of VMware, a software company, by Broadcom, a chipmaker. The European Commission said it was concerned that Broadcom could make VMware’s software inoperable with competitors’ hardware. Separately, Amazon reached a settlement with EU regulators to end an antitrust probe, avoiding a potential fine of 10% of global revenues.

Fact of the day: 1.5m, the number of deaths that could occur in China’s new covid-19 wave, according to The Economist’s worst-case estimate. Read the full story

2022 in review: White-collar workers revisit the office

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking back on 2022. Today, the year in business.

It was supposed to be the year that the world went back to the office. Perhaps even in China. By September 2022The Economist’s normalcy index showed that most forms of activity were nearly back to their pre-pandemic normal. In richer countries, however, offices are stuck at around two-thirds of their pre-pandemic capacity, as they have been since late 2021. Many professionals seem to have settled into a hybrid arrangement of some office days and some remote days.

There is much to recommend hybrid work: flexibility for employees, periods of concentration at home, bursts of co-operation in the office. But managers, especially on Wall Street, have noted the downsides, too. A survey conducted by economists a year ago found that firms expected around a quarter of all work hours to be spent at home in a post-covid world. That is about half what workers said they want; a compromise is still in the making.


2022 in review: Multinationals rethink supply chains

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking back on 2022. Today, the year in business.

Even as the year began, global businesses were growing weary under the weight of tangled supply chains. Shortages of staff and materials were stoking inflation, as the after-effects of the pandemic rippled through the world economy. Then Russia’s invasion of Ukraine sent commodity prices soaring and reminded firms how quickly a political shock can close one market and wreak havoc in others. All this prompted the start of a structural transformation. Firms and governments have begun to prioritise building supply chains that are robust, not just efficient.

The shift has another discernible direction: away from China. “The world’s factory”, an epithet often applied to China, is a designation that now makes some businesses nervous. New research spells out the benefits of more diverse supply chains. America and Europe have made the push geopolitical, too, by boosting domestic chipmakers to reduce their reliance on China in the name of national security. The new age of diversification might also herald an era of industrial policy.

2022 in review: Big tech’s big reckoning

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking back on 2022. Today, the year in business.

Having fattened themselves on the feast of 2021, the five largest tech firms started 2022 comprising over 20% of the S&P 500 index. Meta was first among the MAAMA (Meta, Alphabet, Amazon, Microsoft and Apple) to slip. Blindsided by TikTok’s incursion into social media, and then by Apple’s new privacy rules, Facebook’s parent came bearing bad news on February 2nd. The other giants’ investors glimpsed its shadow and turned tail. Suddenly the narrative of the 2010s—of natural monopolies enjoying an effortless dominance over the economy and investment portfolios—began to falter.

Over the summer bubbles started popping. By the fourth quarter Meta had shed 74% of its share price and sacked 11,000 workers. The total market capitalisation of MAAMA fell by $3.7trn. Still-private tech startups, having raised a stonking $621bn in 2021, were hit even harder. And so, despite the spectre of “conglomeritis”, the biggest firms—those still fat enough to hibernate for the next few years—were the most hopeful about weathering the winter ahead.

2022 in review: Elon Musk’s wild Twitter ride

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking back on 2022. Today, the year in business.

The most stupendous (or at least stupefying) business story of the year started with a corporate takeover that at first nobody seemed to want and eventually nobody could stop watching. Back in April, Elon Musk was the richest man in the world, thanks to the public valuation of Tesla, his electric-car company. He hatched a plan to buy Twitter, a chitter-chattery social-media platform—not for pecuniary purposes, he said, but to save “free speech”.

Having offered to buy at an implied value of $44bn, within a month Mr Musk changed his mind. But Twitter’s board kept him to his word, and by October he became its owner, reluctantly. And vengefully: he halved the staff overnight, scared away advertisers and generally turned the business upside-down. Innovations might have been welcome, but not like the $8 monthly blue “verified” tick that Mr Musk’s right-wing fan base cheered on. Free speech fared even worse. By December Mr Musk began expelling journalists from the site. And after Tesla’s shares tanked, he lost his place as the world’s richest person.

On December 18th Mr Musk asked Twitter users if he should step down as the platform’s CEO. After they voted “Yes”, he promised to find a replacement. Finding a new owner for the company however would be a real feat.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which female character is the focus of the Truman Capote novella “Breakfast at Tiffany’s”?

Tuesday: What Wyoming attraction erupts every one to two hours?

As an artist, you're never happy with anything you do. It's part of the process.

Kate Bush
