The world in brief
April 29, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The share price of First Republic plunged by 49% in after-hours trading on Friday after CNBC said that it could enter receivership. Regulators are reportedly scrambling to find a buyer for the mid-sized American lender. Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve admitted that the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank in March was partly the result of its own “weaknesses in regulation and supervision”.

Russia launched a wave of air strikes against several cities in Ukraine, including Kyiv, the capital. Officials said at least 23 people were killed; three children are among the dead. It is the first such attack in months and comes a day after Russia said it would welcome anything that would bring peace closer.

America began evacuating its citizens from Khartoum, Sudan’s capital. A convoy of buses carrying about 300 civilians, monitored by armed American drones, followed the same evacuation route to the Red Sea used by the UN and other countries. Sudan’s warring military factions agreed on Thursday to a three-day extension of a ceasefire, which has been partially respected.

The European Commission reached a tentative deal to allow Ukrainian grain to resume transiting through four nearby countries. Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia recently banned Ukrainian produce imports after an influx had driven down local prices, angering farmers. Under the deal, which also includes Romania, farmers will get €100m ($110m) in support. The agreement covers wheat, maize, rapeseed and sunflower seed.

Kishida Fumio, Japan’s prime minister, will reportedly visit South Korea in May and meet with Yoon Suk-yeol, the country’s president. It would be the first trip to South Korea by a Japanese leader in five years. The pair will discuss co-operation over addressing North Korea’s ballistic missile program, according to reports. The leaders met in Tokyo in March in an attempt to improve strained relations between the countries.

Turkey’s largest Kurdish political party endorsed Kemal Kilicdaroglu, who is challenging President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in elections on May 14th. Kurds make up about a fifth of the population. The Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) has repeatedly sparred with Mr Erdogan, and is facing a potential ban over allegations that it transferred money to Kurdish separatists.

Richard Sharp resigned as the BBC’s chairman following an investigation into his facilitation of a £800,000 ($1m) loan to the country’s former prime minister, Boris Johnson, before his appointment in 2021. Mr Sharp said that his breach of governance code by not disclosing his involvement was “not material” but that it was distracting from the BBC’s work. A successor will be picked by June.

Word of the week: Xivilisation, a portmanteau referring to Xi Jinping’s Global Civilisation Initiative, the Chinese president’s plan for a harmonious world. Read the full story.


PHOTO: ROD LAMKEY/POOL/CNP/STARTRAKSPHO
Biden meets the press
The White House Correspondents’ Association Dinner, which takes place on Saturday, is once again a hot ticket. At the annual event for Washington reporters, a comedian pokes fun at the president sitting nearby, who is expected to take the mockery in stride. But Donald Trump, who has a thin skin and an antipathy to the press, skipped the dinners and held rallies on the same evening, dampening attendance. Joe Biden, on the other hand, is game to endure a ribbing. “I got a promise I will not be going to jail,” joked Trevor Noah, the jester last year.

Although Mr Biden has not called news outlets “the enemy of the people”, he has hardly made time for them. He has held the fewest press conferences and granted the fewest interviews since Ronald Reagan was in office in the 1980s. “Watch me”, the contender for re-election likes to say in response to questions about his age. Americans might reasonably ask, how can we?


PHOTO: AP
A film about boxing’s greatest comeback
Among other things George Foreman is famous for a defeat: the “Rumble in the Jungle” in 1974. In the Democratic Republic of Congo (then Zaire) “Big George”, the world heavyweight champion, exhausted himself by throwing punches while his opponent, Muhammad Ali, leant back on the slack rope. Ali knocked Mr Foreman out in the eighth round as the stadium chanted “Ali, boumayé! Ali, kill him!”

Three years later, Mr Foreman had a near-death experience in the dressing room after losing a fight. Big George gave up professional boxing and became a pastor. But, needing money, he returned to the sport in 1987, eventually triumphing at the age of 45 over the 26-year-old Michael Moorer to become world champion again.

“Big George Foreman”, a film released this week, charts his life from his impoverished childhood in Texas to a career that included five victorious title fights. An uplifting rags-to-riches story, the film is at times schmaltzy. “Big George Foreman” is not complex, but its subject is so extraordinary that it hardly needs to be.


PHOTO: AP
Lost in translation
A newly prominent combatant in America’s culture wars is due in Florence, Italy on Saturday. Hope Carrasquilla was forced to resign as principal of a charter school in Tallahassee, Florida after showing her 11- and 12-year-old students an image of Michelangelo’s David, a statue of a naked man. One parent called it pornographic. Two others complained that they were not warned that the picture would be shown.

Ms Carrasquilla will be a guest of Dario Nardella, the mayor of Florence, Michelangelo’s home city. She will take part in a public debate in the city hall. Her ousting has prompted outrage in Italy. “Confusing art with pornography is ridiculous—even offensive,” said Mr Nardella. In America the incident has fed a wider controversy over efforts by some Republican officials to give parents a greater, even decisive, say in curriculums. The school at which Ms Carrasquilla taught claims to offer its students “a content-rich classical education”.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Medication overload
Doctors call it “polypharmacy”—the habitual use of multiple pills. In England about 15% of people take five or more prescription drugs a day. That share only rises as people age.

Taking lots of pills can cause its own problems. The more someone takes, the more likely it becomes that some of them will interact in harmful ways. Drugs can affect the same biological pathway, potentially causing an overdose. Yet de-prescribing is unfamiliar terrain for health systems. Money for studies is scant. Drug firms, the main sponsors of clinical trials, are not interested, for obvious reasons.

That is beginning to change, however. In Canada trials suggest that brochures explaining alternatives to some drugs—such as cognitive behavioural therapy rather than sleeping pills for insomnia—are effective at weaning patients off medication. Automated de-prescribing tools have also been developed. The Drug Burden Index, one such tool, tallies the cumulative doses of drugs with sedative and other effects. A medical movement, in other words, is beginning.


PHOTO: AP
Weekend profile: Amritpal Singh, a radical Sikh leader in India
The police tell a tale of an intrepid capture. Tipped off that Amritpal Singh, a Sikh preacher and separatist whom they had been pursuing for a month, was hiding in a village in the northern Indian state of Punjab, officers sealed it off and, early on April 23rd, arrested him. The version Mr Singh’s supporters tell is less dramatic: the charismatic 30-year-old called the police on himself and surrendered. He has been charged with attempted murder, among other things, over an attack on a police station in February.

Mr Singh’s sudden notoriety has raised fears of a resurgence of the militant Sikh separatism that once threatened to tear India apart. With his long beard and flowing white garments, he models himself on Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, a Sikh leader who was killed by the Indian army in 1984, setting off a decade-long insurgency in which thousands were killed.

Much of Mr Singh’s story remains murky. Before he returned home to Punjab last year, he had worked in Dubai in his family’s transport business for a decade. He wore T-shirts and short hair, showing few signs of religious fervour. He first garnered popularity on social media, supporting protests which forced Narendra Modi, the prime minister, to rescind new farm laws in November 2021.

It was only last summer that Mr Singh donned his new attire and anointed himself leader of Waris Punjab De, an outfit which demands an independent Sikh nation of Khalistan. His followers, mostly young men, were inherited from the organisation’s founder, an actor who died in a car accident early last year.

Mr Singh’s arrest has not prompted significant protests, suggesting there is less support for him than there is interest. Yet his agenda, which mingles demands for action on social problems in Punjab, such as a drug epidemic, with Sikh separatism, could yet strike a chord in the Sikh-majority state.

The authorities seem to understand the political risk. After they angered the public with internet shutdowns during their search for Mr Singh, the police took care over his arrest, firing no shots and respecting the sanctity of the gurdwara where he was hiding. The government may not show such judiciousness in addressing the issues Mr Singh has identified.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Creep must manoeuvre around our legal authority (7, 5)

1 across Follow exhausted sleuth and outlaw (6)

2 across Criminal group’s mania after small fortune exchanged for scrap of newspaper (5)

3 across Spat about regularly discounted fare results in extra charge (6)

Factual clues

1 down The target of Binyamin Netanyahu’s reforms (7, 5)

1 across A cabinet which, in Britain, produces well-meaning but boring books (6)

2 across Something split by Russia’s invasion (5)

3 across Ukraine’s access to Europe’s single market is currently free of this (6)



This week's quiz winners
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Karl Dowling, Dublin, Ireland

Jim Barnes, St. John’s, Canada

Sylvia Freund, San Salvador, El Salvador

They all gave the correct answers of Blue Jasmine, Anne of Green Gables, Assam, Chamomile and Earl Grey. The theme is teas; jasmine, green, assam, chamomile and Earl Grey.

The questions:

Monday: For which Woody Allen film did Cate Blanchett win the Best Actress Oscar?
Tuesday: Which novel by L. M. Montgomery is widely acknowledged as a children’s classic?
Wednesday: Dispur is the capital of which Indian province?
Thursday: Which daisy-like flower gets its name from the Greek for “earth apple”?
Friday: Which British prime minister pushed through the Great Reform Act of 1832?

There is no terror in the bang, only in the anticipation of it.

Alfred Hitchcock
