The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 9 hours ago (20:00 GMT / 04:00 Hong Kong)

Zhejiang, a province in eastern China, reported 1m new daily covid-19 infections, as the country grapples with a surge in cases. Nearly 250m people may have been infected in the first 20 days of December, according to the country’s health authority. The estimate is far higher than the official reported figure. Despite reports of overcrowded morgues, the Centre for Disease Control and Prevention claimed there had been no covid deaths in the five days to Saturday. Hospitals in several provinces said that rising cases were causing blood shortages.

Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, said that he was ready to negotiate with Ukraineand others over the war that he started–even as Russia continues to bombard civilians and infrastructure in Ukraine. Ukrainian officials dismissed Mr Putin’s comments as lip service. William Burns, director of the CIA, has also said that Russia is not serious about talks.

China’s armed forces conducted “strike drills”⁠—rehearsals for conflict⁠—around Taiwan, in response to what it claimed were provocations from America and the self-governing island. China regards Taiwan as a renegade province and has not ruled out the use of force to “re-unify” it with the mainland. Tensions have been especially high since Nancy Pelosi, the speaker of America’s House of Representatives, visited the island in August.

Three international aid organisations said they were suspending operations in Afghanistan after the Taliban barred women from working for NGOs. Save the Children, the Norwegian Refugee Council and CARE said they cannot effectively reach people in need without women in their workforce. The Taliban have grown increasingly repressive since returning to power in August 2021: earlier women were banned from attending university, sparking protests across the country.

Iran’s Revolutionary Guards arrested seven people linked to anti-government protests, including some British dual nationals who were trying to leave the country. Meanwhile, the Supreme Court commuted the death sentence of Saman Seydi Yasin, a rapper, who had been convicted in a sham trial of attempting to kill security forces. Two protesters have been executed this month.

Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s incoming prime minister, rebuked his new far-right coalition allies for suggesting that doctors and other workers should be allowed to deny services to LGBT people. Mr Netanyahu is returning to power with a coalition that includes Religious Zionism, a movement whose leaders are openly homophobic, along with two parties that exclude women.

Around 1,000 soldiers and 130 police officers were deployed in a Christmas Eve raid against drug dealers in El Salvador. Security forces arrested 23 people and seized $10,000 in cash along with packages of drugs. Nayib Bukele, the president, has cracked down on gangs, but sometimes at the expense of innocent people.

Fact of the day: 78%, the share of French people who support the legalisation of assisted dying. Read the full story.

How might the war in Ukraine play out in 2023?

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking ahead to next year’s big stories. Today, what will be shaping Europe?

As 2022 draws to a close, Ukraine is still an independent state—something few may have predicted when Russia invaded it in February. Three broad scenarios now seem plausible for next year. The first, and worst, assumes that Russia stabilises the front lines and rebuilds its battalions. Supplies and arms from America and Europe could dwindle. Western countries might then lobby Ukraine to accept a ceasefire.

The second, and far more likely, is a stalemate. Russia might mobilise enough young men to fill trenches and man fortifications, without training them to be the effective fighters needed for victory. Unwilling to concede, President Vladimir Putin might simply try to exhaust Ukraine and its allies.

The third is the most encouraging, and possibly the most dangerous. Ukraine, maintaining its current momentum, could bring its forces to the cusp of Crimea. Mr Putin might then issue an ultimatum: stop or risk the use of nuclear weapons. The world will hold its breath.

Inflation will make next year tough for Europe

PHOTO: ALAMY
This week we are looking ahead to next year’s big stories. Today, what will be shaping Europe?

In 2023 the full economic impact of price rises—and the energy crunch largely responsible for them—will be felt across Europe. A recession is coming, followed by a painfully slow recovery.

Though Europe added to its capacity to import liquefied natural gas after Russia slashed sales, global LNG supplies will not increase by much in 2023. That means energy will remain expensive, and it will keep prices high across the rest of the economy. Hard-hit consumers and businesses will start to hold back, curbing both spending and investment.

Europe’s shortage of workers will get worse, which will hurt firms but keep unemployment low. But unlike in previous slumps, the global economy will not come to Europe’s rescue: it is currently suffering much the same malaise. Only once energy prices have fallen and inflation in America has been contained will global growth be able to support Europe’s recovery. That will come, but not in 2023.

Many Britons expect more civil disorder

PHOTO: ALAMY
This week we are looking ahead to next year’s big stories. Today, what will be shaping Europe?

Barring sectarian scuffles in Northern Ireland, Britain has experienced relatively little civil disorder in the past ten years. That peaceful run will probably end in 2023—though not necessarily for the most obvious reason.

The soaring cost of energy and food seems dangerous, but bad behaviour does not always follow bad economic times. People are more likely to riot because they feel the authorities are behaving intolerably, and because they think they can get away with it. Both conditions now apply in Blighty.

In London, the epicentre of most British disorder, attitudes to the police have deteriorated in recent years: in March 2022 57% of Londoners described the force as reliable, compared with 77% in 2014. A string of crimes, including the murder of Sarah Everard by a police officer in 2021, surely contributed, as did a sharp increase in the number of people stopped and searched. And as memories fade of riots in decades past, so too may fears of the baleful consequences of fresh disorder.


Can Europe’s anti-Putin alliance hold?

PHOTO: ALAMY
This week we are looking ahead to next year’s big stories. Today, what will be shaping Europe?

The remarkable unity shown by European governments in 2022—in response to President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine—will probably be tested in 2023. The longer the war continues, the more likely it is that some in Europe will call for a negotiated peace. Some may yearn for a resumption of Russian gas exports; others might fear that Europe will have to shoulder more of the burden if America’s support for Ukraine declines after its presidential election in 2024.

Although these voices are not expected to prevail, they will cause discord and tension. Italy’s economic woes could lead to a weakening of the support for Ukraine that Giorgia Meloni, the new prime minister, currently espouses. And as more countries slip into recession, the leaders of the poorest may become more amenable to the idea of negotiation—and increasingly bitter towards their wealthier neighbours, which can more easily weather the storm.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which of the 50 US states is sometimes known as the “copper state”?

There are dangers in religious freedom and freedom of opinion. But to deny these rights is worse than dangerous.

Harry Truman
