The world in brief
May 3, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

American regional bank shares fell sharply a day after First Republic, a San Francisco-based bank, was shut down by American regulators—the third such intervention since the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank in March. Shares in PacWest, a mid-sized bank, fell by 25%. Earlier, investors at the influential Milken conference in California warned that increased regulation of banks could curtail lending, hurting the American economy.

The leaders of Sudan’s warring factions agreed to a one-week truce from Thursday and will select envoys for peace talks, according to neighbouring South Sudan, which has been working to negotiate an end to the fighting. Previous ceasefires have been only partially respected. Earlier the UN said that the conflict in Sudan may displace more than 800,000 people.

Annual inflation in the euro zone rose to 7% in April, from 6.9% in March, well above the European Central Bank’s 2% target. Separate data showed that banks have restricted lending and demand for loans has dropped, indicating an economic slowdown. This complicates the ECB’s interest-rate decision on Thursday: the former suggests continuing with tight monetary policy; the latter suggests the opposite.

A freight train derailed in south-west Russia, near the border with Belarus and Ukraine, after an explosive device detonated. Officials called it “illegal interference in the work of railway transport”. The area has seen sabotage attacks since the start of the war. A similar incident on Monday, closer to the border with Ukraine, caused another train to catch fire.

Greece’s highest court upheld legislation that in effect bans the far-right Greeks party from standing in upcoming parliamentary elections, in what is believed to be the first such disqualification since the end of military rule in 1974. In February lawmakers barred parties headed by anyone convicted of serious crimes. Until recently the Greeks were led by a neo-Nazi who is currently in prison.

Hindenburg Research, a short-selling firm, published a report saying that Icahn Enterprises, a publicly traded American holding company, is overvalued and operating “ponzi-like economic structures”. Shares of Icahn fell by as much as 24% on its publication. In February, the short-seller released a scathing report on India’s Adani Group, wiping out more than $100bn in its market value.

Shares in Chegg, an online service that offers on-demand answers to exam questions, fell by almost 50% after it admitted that some of its clientele may have shifted to ChatGPT. It reported a 7% decline in yearly revenue; subscribers dropped by 5%. Shares in other online learning tools, such as Pearson and Coursera, also fell.

Fact of the day: 80%, the proportion of Afghanistan’s 2.5m school-age women and girls that are not being educated. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Press freedom is in decline
The spread of authoritarianism and attacks on democracy have eroded press freedom around the world. A 2022 analysis of 180 countries by Reporters Without Borders, a non-profit group, classified the situation as “very bad” in 28 countries—a record number. Its latest analysis will be published on Wednesday, designated as World Press Freedom Day by the United Nations.

It will probably show that things have become even worse. Attacks on journalists, both physical and online, are all too common. The Russian authorities’ arrest of Evan Gershkovich, a correspondent for the Wall Street Journal, in March on spurious charges showed the extreme lengths governments will go to silence reporters.

The media also increasingly faces another, more insidious, threat: fake news. Artificial intelligence is making it easier to tamper with content and pump out disinformation. When the public no longer knows what to believe, the job of a newsroom is tougher than ever.


PHOTO: ALAMY
The Fed’s final hike?
The market’s mantra is “one and done”. America’s Federal Reserve is expected to raise interest rates on Wednesday, in what would be the tenth increase in a row. Investors expect the Fed to lift short-term borrowing rates to a floor of 5%, up from 0% in March 2022—the country’s sharpest monetary tightening in four decades. But as suggested by the motto—which should perhaps be the less pithy “one more and done”—many think this should be the final turn of the screw.

The Fed’s rapid tightening has engendered financial risks, as evidenced by bank failures in recent weeks. And America’s economy is slowing: employment data released on Friday is likely to show another drop in job creation last month (though no recession, yet). But inflation—the trigger for the tightening—remains uncomfortably high. So even if the next rate increase is the final one in this cycle, the Fed may signal that it will keep rates high until inflation is vanquished.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A deadline for Ukraine’s grain deal
Talks on extending a deal designed to allow Ukrainian ports to export grain are due to resume on Wednesday. The initial agreement, brokered by the UN and Turkey last July, granted Russia sanctions relief on agricultural produce in exchange for unblocking Ukraine’s Black Sea ports. But it expires on May 18th, and the Kremlin has indicated that it is unwilling to agree to an extension.

Ukrainian officials say that Russia is undermining the agreement anyway. One minister has accused it of making exports unviable by taking longer to inspect Ukrainian vessels for no apparent reason. Even with the deal in place grain exports currently stand at around 30% of the pre-war norm. (In peacetime, Ukraine’s ports could export up to 7m tonnes a month.)

To get around Russia’s troublemaking Ukraine has been developing export terminals along the Danube. These ports’ proximity to the territorial waters of Romania, a NATO member, helps protect them from Russian guns. Yet few observers think exports from the Danube can fully compensate for the Black Sea. A lot rides on renewing the deal.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The travails of the Trump Organisation
In recent days a jury in Manhattan has heard E. Jean Carroll, a writer, accuse Donald Trump of raping her in the 1990s. Mr Trump, who denies the allegations, skipped the civil trial citing logistical “burdens”. But he seems unburdened enough to travel to, as he says, “inspect my great properties”. On Monday he opened a new golf course in Scotland; on Wednesday he will tour Trump Doonbeg, another resort in Ireland.

During Mr Trump’s presidency, his real-estate company paused foreign dealmaking. Since he left office it has inked just one deal, with a Saudi firm for a resort in Oman. The Trump Organisation has been preoccupied with lawsuits instead. In January it was fined for tax fraud. And New York’s attorney-general alleges that Mr Trump fraudulently inflated his net worth to secure bigger loans (a charge that he denies). She wants to bar him from real-estate deals in the state for five years. That would at least free up some time for more legal proceedings.


PHOTO: DAVID FREEMAN / THE ROCKY HORROR
Fifty years of “The Rocky Horror Show”
When the “Time Warp” comes on, everyone knows the moves: “it’s just a jump to the left! And then a step to the right!” “The Rocky Horror Show”, Richard O’Brien’s campy send-up of horror films, was first performed in 1973 in a theatre with just 63 seats. It has now been seen by 30m theatregoers and is one of the longest-running musicals in the world. Fifty years after its debut, on Wednesday the raucous comedy returns to London’s West End.

A film from 1975—“The Rocky Horror Picture Show”—further cemented the musical as a subversive cult classic. Audience participation is now a tradition at many showings: spectators shout out lines and dress up like the cast. And Dr Frank-N-Furter’s gender-bending universe was ahead of its time: though some numbers such as “Sweet transvestite” may seem outdated today, it presaged more modern theatrical depictions of drag such as “Kinky Boots” and “Everybody’s Talking About Jamie”. Audiences will probably be doing the Time Warp for many years to come.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: What is the name for the process when academic papers are checked by independent experts in the field before publication?

Tuesday: What word can mean both “the appearance of double images on a TV screen” and “the sudden and unexplained ceasing of communication”?

Truthfulness so often goes with ruthlessness.

Dodie Smith
