The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (07:25 GMT+1 London)

Vladimir Putin said that Russia was not blocking Ukrainian wheat from being exported, and that the grain could be shipped out via ports controlled either by Russia or Ukraine. The Russian president made the claim after meeting Macky Sall, the head of the African Union. The United Nations has warned that Africa is on the brink of famine because of Russia’s war. Before the invasion Russia and Ukraine together accounted for 29% of international annual wheat sales.

Germany’s Bundestag approved a special defence fund worth €100bn ($110bn) to modernise its army, an initiative prompted by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Creating the fund required a constitutional amendment—and thus a two-thirds majority in parliament—to sidestep ordinary borrowing limits. The money should boost German defence spending from around 1.5% of GDP to the NATO standard of at least 2%.

Authorities in Hong Kong closed Victoria Park for fear people might gather to commemorate the anniversary of the massacre around Tiananmen Square. Until 2019 Hong Kong was the only place in China allowed publicly to remember the thousands killed by Chinese troops during pro-democracy demonstrations in 1989. Such events are now banned under its national-security law. Memorials are planned in many cities outside China.

American prosecutors charged Peter Navarro, a former adviser to ex-president Donald Trump, with contempt of Congress for failing to comply with its probe of the Capitol riot. Mr Navarro refused to testify before congressional investigators about the attack of January 6th 2021, claiming his communications with Mr Trump were covered by executive privilege. The two charges each carry maximum penalties of a year in prison and a $100,000 fine.

David McCormick, a former hedge-fund executive, conceded to Mehmet Oz in the Republican Senate primary election in Pennsylvania. Just a few hundred ballots had separated the two candidates, forcing a recount after the vote on May 17th. Dr Oz, a celebrity television doctor, was endorsed by Mr Trump. He will face John Fetterman, the state’s Democratic lieutenant-governor, in the general election in November.

The American economy added 390,000 jobs in May, the fewest for 13 months but more than economists had expected. The unemployment rate remained at 3.6%. The Bureau of Labour Statistics reported “notable job gains” in leisure and hospitality, a sector in which employers have been short of staff as the economy has recovered from the covid-19 pandemic.

Estonia’s prime minister removed the junior coalition partner from her government. Kaja Kallas, who leads the centre-right Reform Party, said that “the security situation in Europe” made it impossible to work with the centre-left Centre Party, which used to have formal links to Vladimir Putin’s party in neighbouring Russia. She accused it of “actively working against Estonia’s core values”. Ms Kallas’s party has enjoyed a surge in popularity since the outbreak of war in Ukraine.

Word of the Week: écoponts, “wildlife bridges” in French. France is building overpasses for animals to reduce roadkill and help them roam more freely. Read the full story.

The shape of America’s coming recession

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America will be lucky to avoid a recession in the next couple of years. As the Federal Reserve aggressively raises interest rates to contain inflation, downward pressure on growth will be intense. No two recessions are alike. America’s most recent two—the global financial crisis of 2007-09 and the shuddering start to the covid-19 pandemic—were bruising. There is reason for cautious optimism that a coming recession will be milder.

Households have ample savings, partly thanks to stimulus payments during the pandemic. An ultra-tight labour market may cushion people from unemployment. Many companies also have insulation after locking in lower borrowing costs. Banks, meanwhile, have better buffers, making them safer than 15 years ago. Instead, the concern is over how policymakers respond. After battling high inflation, there may be little appetite in Washington for a big fiscal or monetary push to revive growth. The stars are aligned for a shallow recession but a tepid recovery.

Is big tech’s red-hot jobs market cooling off?

PHOTO: ALAMY
“Can I keep the monitor and mouse?” a fired tech worker recently asked on Blind, an anonymous social-media platform where techies go to compare notes on employers. As America’s technology giants contend with a looming recession and sliding share prices, many in the industry worry that the sizzling market for tech jobs is cooling. This year listed tech firms worth a combined $3.4trn have announced hiring freezes or firings. The commotion comes after a prolonged boom in the sector.

So far redundancies, rather than just hiring freezes, have been largely confined to startups and newly listed firms. Sackings at established tech companies have been modest. Demand for the most prized skills, such as understanding of advanced data science, is so high that people who possess them will be sought out even in a downturn. That will not stop the anxiety level on Blind from staying elevated for a while.

A memorial to the Tiananmen Square massacre lives on

PHOTO: KA MAN MAK/THE OSLO DESK
In 1997 Jens Galschiot, a Danish artist, commemorated the massacre of students around Tiananmen Square in Beijing in 1989 with a towering sculpture. Called the “Pillar of Shame”, it was a mass of naked, writhing bodies, eight metres high. Until last year it stood at Hong Kong University, when authorities removed it as part of a wider crackdown on free expression in the city.

But activists in places where free speech is welcomed hurried to ensure the pillar lived on. A replica will be unveiled in Prague, the capital of the Czech Republic, on Saturday, the 33rd anniversary of the Tiananmen massacre. On May 25th another was erected in Oslo, Norway’s capital, and a smaller one is planned for Taiwan. There are rumours that Washington may host one too, opposite the Chinese embassy. In an era of pulling statues down, one sculpture has received a new lease of life.

“Borgen” returns

PHOTO: ALAMY
If “The West Wing” set the standard for television series about American politics, the Danish series “Borgen” did so for European parliamentary democracies. Fans of the plucky prime minister, Birgitte Nyborg, were bereft when the third season ended in 2013. Now she is back: on Thursday the fourth season began on Netflix, after airing earlier in Denmark.

As in the real Europe, much has changed. Scheming male politicians have ceded to scheming female ones. Centre-left leaders like Ms Nyborg clash with younger, woker colleagues. Social media has spawned a new generation of spin doctors. The main plot, featuring an oil discovery off Greenland, pits environmentalism against indigenous rights and pulls in Russia, America and China. Many saw in the early series of “Borgen” a complex portrait of a country exemplifying the ideals of social democracy. In the new series those ideals are a bit harder to find.

Weekend Profile: Chesa Boudin, San Francisco’s prosecutor who dislikes prosecuting

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The job of district attorney in San Francisco can vault people to high places. It used to be held by Kamala Harris, America’s vice-president. However, if Chesa Boudin, San Francisco’s current DA, is going anywhere, it is back onto the job market. On June 7th voters will decide whether to “recall” him from office. San Franciscans blame him for a spike in homicides. They say he has failed to rein in open-air drug dealing and clean up homeless encampments.

Mr Boudin surely has the most unusual background of any DA in America. His parents were members of the Weather Underground, a leftist group, and were both convicted for their role in an armed robbery that left two police officers and a security guard dead. (They were the unarmed getaway drivers.) Mr Boudin was raised by the group’s leaders, making frequent visits to prison to see his parents and developing an intimate knowledge of the criminal-justice system.

After graduating from college, he went to Venezuela and worked as a translator for Hugo Chávez, the country’s autocratic left-wing president, and co-wrote a book about the Bolivarian revolution. One of Mr Boudin’s articles from the time argued the world should “congratulate” Mr Chávez for abolishing term limits. He went on to study at Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar, attended Yale Law School and became a public defender. When campaigning to become San Francisco’s DA in 2019, he promised to eliminate cash bail and lock up fewer people. But many in the city now feel his policies have let miscreants operate without consequence. Murders and burglaries are up. In 2021, his office secured just three convictions for drug-dealing, compared with 90 by his predecessor in 2018.

Mr Boudin says the recall campaign against him is politically motivated and funded by Republicans. Yet people of all backgrounds are irked by the city’s deterioration under his watch. Whether or not Mr Boudin is able to hold on to his job (polls suggest his removal is likely), his call to treat criminals and ex-convicts more humanely has changed lives. That includes his father’s. Mr Boudin sought clemency for his dad, who was locked up in New York, and publicly made his case to Andrew Cuomo, then the state’s governor. Last year Mr Boudin’s father was pardoned, after serving 40 years of a 75-year sentence.

Weekend crossword

Welcome to our new crossword, designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Cryptic clues

1 down Real forces crumble in this habitat (5,5)

1 across Fool! Depart for a long river! (5)

2 across At first little gives faith victor will produce Chinese fundraiser (4)

3 across Amos baffled a country (5)

Factual clues

1 down “The rainforests of the ocean” (5,5)

1 across The EAC’s newest member (5)

2 across Together, they owe 52% of China’s GDP (4)

3 across Where Penny Wong went on June 2nd (5)

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent in Friday's edition.


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Jin-Hong Park, Suwon, South Korea

North America: Melissa Markham, Austin, United States

Central and South America: George Power Porto, Lima, Peru

Europe: Patrice Bailly, Aix en Provence, France

Africa: Ailsa Green, Choma, Zambia

Oceania: Alison Morris, Sydney, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Gareth Bale, Key West, Buster Keaton, Val d’Isère and Rosemary Clooney. The theme is actors who played Batman: Christian Bale, Adam West, Michael Keaton, Val Kilmer and George Clooney.

Let us keep the dance of rain our fathers kept and tread our dreams beneath the jungle sky.

Arna Bontemps