The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

December 29, 2022

Ukrainian officials urged residents of Kherson to evacuate as Russian forces escalated their attack on the southern city, which was liberated in November having been occupied by the Russians since the start of the war. Russian shelling of the city has intensified in recent days, causing hundreds to flee. Many of the strikes appear to have been aimed at civilian targets, such as a maternity hospital hit on Tuesday night.

America announced that travellers from China will have to produce a negative covid-19 test on arrival, as of January 5th. Earlier this week China’s government announced that it would end mandatory quarantine for inbound travellers in January, causing record numbers of Chinese to prepare to go overseas. Italy, India, Japan, Malaysia and South Korea have already announced similar measures.

ExxonMobil is suing the European Union over the bloc’s new windfall tax on oil companies. The lawsuit, filed by the oil major’s Dutch and German subsidiaries on Wednesday, argues that the Council of the EU does not have the legal authority to impose the tax—which is aimed at the extra profits fossil-fuel firms are enjoying because of high energy prices—because it is normally a power of sovereign countries.

Pope Francis asked for prayers for his predecessor, Pope Benedict XVI, whom he said was “very sick”. The signs are that Benedict, who is 95, is close to the end. In 2013 Benedict became the first pontiff to resign in 600 years. Styling himself as “pope emeritus”, he has lived in the Vatican ever since, serving as a conservative counterpoint to the more liberal Francis.

Binyamin Netanyahu, the incoming prime minister of Israel, finalised deals to form a coalition, according to the parties involved. Mr Netanyahu is now expected to swear in his new government—one of the most right-wing in Israeli history—on Thursday. On Tuesday the country’s parliament passed controversial legislation which will allow Mr Netanyahu’s allies to take up important government positions.

Kosovo shut its main border crossing with Serbia amid renewed tension between the two countries over Kosovo’s status as an independent nation. Protesters gathered on the Serbian side of the border in support of ethnic Serbs inside Kosovo, who staged mass walk-outs of state institutions last month. Serbia’s president, Aleksandar Vucic, put the military on its highest alert level; America and the EU called for “maximum restraint”.

A Supreme Court judge in Brazil issued a ban on carrying firearms in Brasilia, the capital, ahead of the presidential inauguration of Luiz Inácio “Lula” da Silva. The order prohibits registered gun owners from carrying firearms until January 2nd—the day after the inauguration. Political violence has surged in Brazil since leftist Lula defeated far-right incumbent Jair Bolsonaro in October’s presidential election.

Fact of the day: 10%, the reduction in salary earned by obese women in America, Britain, Canada and Denmark. Read the full story.

2023 in preview: Inflation will come under control

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking ahead to next year’s big stories. Today, what will shape finance?

High inflation has stalked many of the world’s economies over the last couple of years. The surge was driven by looser fiscal policy to combat the pandemic shutdowns followed by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which sent prices of food and energy skyward. In the euro area the rate of consumer-price growth reached a record 10.7% in 2022; in America it peaked at 9%.

Central banks were criticised by some for not raising interest rates early enough to snuff out inflation. Regardless, 2022 was the year in which those increases came regularly, and steeply. Consequently, most countries will get inflation back under control in 2023, but not without serious pain. America’s Federal Reserve predicts an uptick in unemployment in 2023; the Bank of England forecasts a drop in Britain’s GDP. In fact, the last time that the world saw such a confluence of growth-restricting policies, in 1982, it induced a global recession. There is good reason to worry that 2023 will not be any different.


2023 in preview: Expect little relief on energy prices

PHOTO: DPA
This week we are looking ahead to next year’s big stories. Today, what will shape finance?

Despite Western sanctions and Russian supply cuts, Europe should have enough gas to last this winter. And by next winter it should have more terminals to receive liquefied natural gas, making it less dependent on Russia’s piped fuel. Nonetheless, the energy market will probably flare up again in 2023, for two main reasons.

For a start, disruptions to supply look set to continue. From February Russia will ban the sale of its oil and petroleum products to Western countries that have imposed a price cap on them. As the continent sources more of its vast imports from Asia rather than Russia, new bottlenecks are bound to appear. OPEC could also announce yet more big cuts in production in order to keep prices up. Second, refined products, such as petrol and diesel, are becoming scarcer. In February, Europe is set to ban imports of such fuels from Russia. Europe in particular is struggling to produce enough of its own diesel. A global diesel crunch could strike as early as March.

2023 in preview: Will the bull market return?

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking ahead to next year’s big stories. Today, what will shape finance?

Bear markets come in all shapes and sizes. Since the 1950s, there have been 11 of them. The shortest, in 2020, lasted a single month; the longest, from 2000, more than two-and-a-half years. History, then, is not a foolproof guide as to whether stockmarkets will continue into 2023 the slide they began in 2022—but it does offer clues.

The longest slumps occur when the fall in asset prices reveals financial misdeeds committed when the going was good—think subprime mortgages in the mid-2000s. The current bear market has unpicked major crypto businesses and exposed weaknesses in British pension funds, which were imperilled in September 2022 by margin calls on some bond derivatives they held. Volatility in American Treasury markets has spiked, too. However, after 15 years of regulatory reform in the financial system it is hard to imagine anything happening on the scale of 2007-09. That’s the good news. But continued tightening in monetary policy and slowing economic activity may still delay the return of the bulls.

2023 in preview: Low productivity in the boring twenties

PHOTO: ALAMY
This week we are looking ahead to next year’s big stories. Today, what will shape finance?

At the depths of the covid-19 pandemic in 2020-21, many spoke of a silver lining. The rapid development and deployment of vaccines seemed to show that when the world gets its act together it can, indeed, do amazing things. In response pundits predicted a “roaring twenties”, with all sorts of new inventions coming to market. A vaccine for cancer! Driverless cars! Virtual-reality goggles for all! Companies seemed to believe the hype, promising huge increases in investment.

So far, however, the world is proving to be even less innovative than it was before. Global productivity growth is extremely weak, and possibly negative—meaning that the average worker is actually producing less than before. There is little sign that 2023 will be different. The optimistic case is that there is a lag between firms’ investment spending and higher productivity, and that eventually productivity will soar. The realistic case is that world-changing innovations, and thus economic growth, are harder to come by. The twenties are likely to be more boring than roaring.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: What term, which refers to passing a point of no return, relates to an incident in the career of Julius Caesar?

Wednesday: Which rock group is best known for the songs “Alive and Kicking” and “Don’t You (Forget About Me)”?

Pain nourishes courage. You can't be brave if you've only had wonderful things happen to you.

Mary Tyler Moore
