The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 7, 2023

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, rejected Russian calls for a temporary ceasefire to mark Orthodox Christmas, calling it a tactical ploy. Vladimir Putin ordered the unilateral ceasefire between noon on Friday and midnight Saturday. The announcement did not include a time zone, but at midday Moscow time fighting was still raging in eastern Ukraine. Separately, America, France and Germany agreed to send armoured combat vehicles to Ukraine. America will supply a weapons package worth just over $3bn that includes Bradley fighting vehicles, France will send AMX-10RCs and Germany is donating Marders and a Patriot missile-defence system.

On the fourth day of voting, Kevin McCarthy lost a 12th ballot to become Speaker of America’s House of Representatives but improved over previous rounds, flipping 14 hard-line Republicans. The development came after Mr McCarthy offered concessions, including allowing a single lawmaker to force a vote ousting the speaker. Seven right-wing Republican holdouts still voted against him.

American jobs growth fell in December as high interest rates cooled the labour market, a consequence of the Federal Reserve’s ongoing battle against high inflation. America added 223,000 jobs last month, official statistics showed, compared with 256,000 in November. Still, the unemployment rate dipped from 3.6% to 3.5%. That means the Fed is likely to continue its aggressive monetary policy.

America’s Food and Drug Administration conditionally approved a new Alzheimer’s treatment that may slow the disease’s progress, following an 18-month clinical trial that showed promising results. The regulator directed the drug, called lecanemab, to be labelled for patients in early and mild stages of Alzheimer’s. In 2021 the FDA approved a different Alzheimer’s drug and was widely criticised for doing so prematurely.

Euro zone inflation slowed more than anticipated in December, helped by a drop in gas prices. Headline annual inflation fell for a second consecutive month, down from 10.1% in November to 9.2% in December. But core inflation, which omits volatile energy and food prices, rose from 5% to 5.2%, signalling more underlying inflationary pressures. François Villeroy de Galhau, France’s central bank governor, warned of further European interest-rate rises.

Britain’s government announced a plan to support research into mRNA vaccines for cancer treatment, in partnership with BioNTech, a German company that used the technology to create a covid-19 vaccine. The plan aims to accelerate clinical trials for the vaccines, with the goal of delivering treatments to 10,000 patients by 2030. BioNTech’s co-founder, Ozlem Tureci, said that Britain was a “great partner” for the project.

An American warship sailed through the Taiwan Strait, sparking ire from China, which claims Taiwan as its territory. America, which is committed to helping the self-governing island defend itself, intermittently sends ships through the strait as part of what it considers routine military exercises. China said the latest move undermined the region’s “peace and stability”.

Word of the Week: mauj, the name of a sex-education website run by Arab women, meaning “wave” (of sexual pleasure) in Arabic. Read the full story.

A divided Orthodox Christmas

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
For most Christians, the last traces of Christmas will be gone by Saturday. Some consider it bad luck to keep up decorations after Epiphany, on Friday. But members of the Orthodox Church, the dominant religion in Russia and Ukraine, will be celebrating. They follow the Julian calendar, rather than the more-popular Gregorian, so Christmas Day falls on Saturday. Russia ordered a brief ceasefire in its war to mark the occasion, though fighting has continued.

But many Ukrainians have already celebrated the nativity. For the first time, the Orthodox Church of Ukraine (OCU), one of two main Orthodox churches in the country, allowed the faithful to mark Christmas on December 25th.

That sets the OCU at odds with the Russian Orthodox Church and with the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (UOC), the country’s other main church. Until May the UOC fell under the authority of the Russian church. Many still view it as a fifth column. This Christmas is unlikely to bring much unity.

Facebook’s de-platforming decision

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The morning after the Capitol riot, Mark Zuckerberg indefinitely suspended Donald Trump’s Facebook and Instagram accounts. Mr Trump had used the sites to “condone rather than condemn” that day’s violence, said the social-media firms’ boss. The ban was later shortened to two years, with the possibility of his re-platforming if the “risk to public safety” had diminished. The two-year mark comes on Saturday; a verdict about whether to reinstate Mr Trump is expected later this month.

The choice is thorny, though arguably less consequential than one might think. First, the former president may choose not to post, preferring Truth Social, his own platform. Mr Trump has stayed mum on Twitter since Elon Musk welcomed him back to that site in November. Second, he is much diminished as a political figure, especially after his chosen candidates’ dismal showing at the midterm elections. His pronouncements, put simply, matter less than they once did.

Covid surveillance is faltering

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Three years ago this week scientists in China isolated the first strain of the novel coronavirus that would spawn the covid-19 pandemic. Again all eyes are on China: the country has stopped reporting reliable data on cases and deaths, just as it faces the world’s biggest wave of infections. That is stoking worries that if a scary new variant emerges there, other countries will be unaware until their hospitals fill up.

But variants can appear anywhere. More infections increase the chances of that, and covid is spreading freely around the world. About 2% of people in Britain, for example, had covid on any given day in recent months. The latest—and most contagious—offshoot of the Omicron variant, called XBB.1.5, probably originated in America. Sharing genomic sequences is the first step to dealing with new variants. But as countries abandon testing, such surveillance is winding down. That is what the world should worry about most.

Prince Harry’s agonistes

PHOTO:
There must be some very irritated Netflix executives. Six agonising hours of the royal docusoap offered little more than cashmere, California and platitudes. By contrast, even before its official publication on Tuesday, leaks from Prince Harry’s new book, “Spare”, have offered revelations about him losing his virginity to an older woman in a field (he “mounted her quickly”; she “spanked” him); tripping on magic mushrooms (he imagined that a pedal bin spoke); and a description of how his father broke the news about Diana’s death (there was no hug).

Perhaps most sensationally, Harry has revealed that during a fight in which Prince William called his wife Meghan “difficult” and “rude”, his brother grabbed him “by the collar, ripping my necklace, and…knocked me to the floor.” Until that moment, few had probably realised that the fifth in line to the throne still wore a necklace.

Weekend Profile: Andriy Kostin, Ukraine’s prosecutor with a plan

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Few would envy Andriy Kostin, Ukraine’s newish prosecutor-general. His office is short on armoured vehicles, bulletproof vests and kit to detect landmines, which he calls “a real threat” to his officers in the field. His office has nonetheless recorded more than 60,000 alleged Russian war crimes, ranging from torture and executions to strikes on over 400 medical facilities. Allies have lent him investigators, but with only about 200 Ukrainian war-crimes prosecutors, the team is stretched thin.

An inauspicious discovery led to Mr Kostin’s appointment, in July. His predecessor was dismissed after numerous prosecutorial officials were suspected of collaborating with Russia. But Mr Kostin, a law graduate of Odessa National University, is himself not entirely free of controversy. In 2021 Mr Kostin’s candidacy to lead an anti-corruption arm of the institution he now runs failed. Watchdogs saw “significant violations” in his ethical conduct, including two visits to occupied Crimea, failure to report a sale of real estate to a different anti-corruption body, and “possible nepotism”.

Mr Kostin now dismisses the matter as a “historical question”; in the present, he is crafting a bold agenda. He describes Russia’s war as genocide, noting that Russian officials have spoken of “de-Ukrainisation”. He says some 14,000 cases of Ukrainian children being forcibly taken to Russia and Belarus amount to “stealing” Ukraine’s future. Mr Kostin believes that most cases of Russian war crimes can be tried in Ukrainian courts. They have already convicted 21 people of war crimes, some in absentia.

More ambitiously, Mr Kostin would also like to see Russia’s top leaders tried for aggression against Ukraine, but neither Ukraine nor the International Criminal Court have the legal authority to do so. Mr Kostin is therefore lobbying hard for the creation of a special international tribunal, possibly by a vote of the UN’s general assembly—no small undertaking. The tribunal’s priority would be to try Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president. Many countries will hesitate to lend support. But outrage over Russia’s war, Mr Kostin says, is steadily building the necessary political capital. If Mr Kostin succeeds, he will have made his mark on history.

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Holy father ordered bishop outside poetic eden (4, 8)

1 across Odd people with a lot of land in part of Europe (6)

2 across The opposition has energy, revolutionary troops, and something unknown (5)

3 across Little outlaw even ignored carmaker (6)

Factual clues

1 down An iron fist in a white glove (4, 8)

1 across Germany’s unhappy neighbour (6)

2 across What Ukraine needs resources to repel (5)

3 across What has been overtaken by Tesla (6)


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Alexa Baker, Berlin, Germany

Mike Soar, Philadelphia, United States

Peter Nicklin, Naivasha, Kenya

They all gave the correct answers of the Reverend Collins, The Moon and Sixpence, Watts, Henley-on-Thames and Kenneth Starr. The theme is famous drummers: Phil Collins, Keith Moon, Charlie Watts, Don Henley and Ringo Starr.

Of all things, I liked books best.

Nikola Tesla
