The world in brief
April 7, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, urged President Xi Jinping to “bring Russia to its senses” over the war in Ukraine during a meeting in Beijing. Mr Macron was joined in China by Ursula von der Leyen, the head of the European Commission. Mr Macron took with him a large business delegation on the trip, as he seeks to bolster trade ties. Mrs von der Leyen took a different line: in a press conference, she argued that Europeans should “de-risk” their commercial ties to the country.

At least 34 rockets were launched from southern Lebanon towards northern Israel, according to Israeli officials, in what may be the largest single such bombardment since the Lebanon war in 2006. Around 25 were intercepted by Israel’s air defence system. Separately, Palestinian groups in Gaza launched several rockets towards Israel, according to Israel’s armed forces. The attacks followed a second Israeli police raid on Jerusalem’s al-Aqsa mosque.

Kristalina Georgieva, the head of the IMF, warned that the global economy is facing years of slow growth. In her curtain-raising speech ahead of the fund’s Spring Meetings, Ms Georgieva said that the lingering effects of covid-19 lockdowns and the war in Ukraine would probably hamper the economy for the next five years, with growth rates set to remain below average at around 3% per year.

Prince Faisal bin Farhan Al Saud, Saudi Arabia’s foreign minister, met Hossein Amirabdollahian, his Iranian counterpart, in China. The meeting takes place after China brokered a rapprochement between the two countries in March; it is the first official encounter of their top diplomats in seven years. In a joint statement, Saudi Arabia and Iran confirmed that they would resume diplomatic relations within two months.

Silvio Berlusconi, Italy’s former prime minister and billionaire media tycoon, is being treated for a type of chronic leukaemia, according to his doctors in Milan. Mr Berlusconi dominated Italian politics for decades, and is still the leader of his party, Forza Italia. He has recently suffered from several bouts of ill health, and underwent open-heart surgery in 2016.

Russian prosecutors requested that Vladimir Kara-Murza, a critic of the Kremlin, be sentenced to 25 years in prison. He faces charges of treason, among other offences, over his criticism of the war in Ukraine. Mr Kara-Murza’s trial was delayed owing to health problems that he developed following two alleged poison attacks, in 2015 and 2017.

BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager, has been appointed by America’s government to help sell a portfolio of securities worth $114bn that belonged to Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank, two lenders that collapsed in March. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which regulates bank deposits, said the assets would be sold gradually to avoid “any adverse impact on market functioning”.

Fact of the day: 20%, the proportion of Latin Americans that identify as evangelicals, up from 10% in 2002. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
The surprising resilience of American jobs
In the past year the world’s largest economy has had a lot to deal with: the fallout from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, inflation and, now, turmoil in the banking sector. Banks, economists and officials have been predicting a recession in America for more than a year. But it has still not arrived—and jobs numbers published on Friday will probably show that, for all the doom and gloom, America’s economy remains strong.

Economists expect America to have added about 250,000 jobs in March. Recent data volatility, though, means that the exact figure is anyone’s guess. One concern is that the report cannot fully capture the fallout from the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank, which largely occurred in the second half of the month. But so-called “high-frequency” data—on everything from vacancies to credit-card spending—collected more recently suggest that demand for labour has remained strong. The jobs machine is likely to whirr away for some time yet.


PHOTO: AFP
Russia’s economy rises from the dead
Official GDP numbers for the fourth quarter of 2022, released on Friday, will probably show that Russian economic growth has recovered from its slump last spring. President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 was quickly followed by a bank run and Western firms quitting the country in droves.

Things have improved since then. Russia has reorientated its trading and investment relationships, including by boosting hydrocarbon exports to China and India. Policymakers acted quickly to shore up banks and help real incomes. Plus Russia benefited substantially from high oil and gas prices. The suspicion that the government is fiddling its books to make the economy look better than it is seems unfounded too. Alternative gauges of economic activity, based on private-sector measures such as electricity consumption, also show a rebound. But the coming year looks trickier. Hydrocarbon prices have fallen, while war expenditures keep rising. But there is little hope that economic factors will force Russia to the negotiating table any time soon.



PHOTO: REUTERS
The dedication of Pope Francis
Pope Francis is about to embark on a particularly gruelling few days. Recovering from a bout of bronchitis that required hospitalisation and using a wheelchair, he is hardly match fit. Nevertheless, on Friday he is expected at two events, including a lengthy nighttime procession at the Colosseum commemorating Jesus’s journey to the cross. Francis is then due at an Easter vigil on Saturday, before presiding at the lengthy Easter Mass in St Peter’s basilica on Sunday (followed by the traditional papal address) and leading another prayer service on Monday. It is an agenda that would daunt a younger and fitter man. Catholics and others who admire the jovial, liberally-minded Francis will watch his progress with concern.

Historically, Popes were expected to tough it out to the last. Saint John Paul II’s suffering was painful to behold. But his successor, Benedict XVI, resigned in 2013 due to failing health and old age. Francis has said he does not think resignations should become “fashion”, but has not totally ruled one out.


PHOTO: EPA
Thailand gears up for an unfair election
Friday is the deadline for parties to submit their prime-ministerial candidates for Thailand’s general election, scheduled for May 14th. A host of pro-army candidates, including Prayuth Chan-ocha, a former army chief and the current prime minister, have already entered the race. So too has Paetongtarn Shinawatra, the 36-year-old daughter of Thaksin Shinawatra, the self-exiled former premier.

The Shinawatra clan, still wildly popular in rural areas, has proved unbeatable in free and fair elections. Mr Thaksin won in 2001 and 2005; his sister Yingluck won in 2011. (The army ousted both.) But the royalist government that has ruled since 2014 has rigged the political system in its favour: thanks to the unanimous support of the army-appointed upper house of parliament, pro-army candidates need 126 votes in the 500-strong house of representatives to win; pro-democracy candidates require 376. Ms Paetongtarn’s popular Pheu Thai party, though, might even clear that restrictive bar. And if the Bangkok-based establishment—the army, palace and their wealthy supporters—dislikes it? The army can always stage another coup.


PHOTO: A24
A more sympathetic portrayal of the art world
On the big screen, the art world is often the object of sneering commentary about wealth and class. But “Showing Up”, released in American cinemas on Friday, is an account of ordinary artists, well, making art. Lizzy (Michelle Williams) is an introverted sculptor in Portland, Oregon, working as a receptionist by day and tending to her intricate clay sculptures by night. She also contends with the demands of her family and friends, most of whom have their own artistic inclinations.

The portraits painted by Kelly Reichardt, the director, are not universally flattering. Lizzy’s father, a retired potter, hits on young women at his daughter’s show; a friend who is a more successful artist than Lizzy is comically self-absorbed. Yet the film is full of pathos, humour and sincere conversations about art, and why people make it. Ms Reichardt spends as much time on the act of creation as she does the foibles of creators, offering a corrective to the satirical swipes frequently aimed at them.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Friday: Which landmark, which took nearly 200 years to build, was used by Galileo to test his theory that the speed of descent was independent of an object’s mass?

Thursday: Which cartoon character originally appeared in a film called “Steamboat Willie”?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

William Cran, London, Britain

Anand Mahajan, Mumbai, India

Joanna Nizio-Masior, Wadowice, Poland

They all gave the correct answers of Humza Yousaf, hacker, yield, and French. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Quality means doing it right when no one is looking.

Henry Ford