The world in brief
July 17, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The EU and Tunisia inked a deal worth €1bn ($1.1bn), with €105m funding a new partnership to combat people-smuggling. A growing proportion of migrants are journeying to Europe from or through the north African country. Giorgia Meloni, Italy’s prime minister who attended talks in Tunisia, praised the deal as a “model” for EU-north African relations. The package also includes loans to help Tunisia’s collapsing economy.

Extraordinary heatwaves continued around the world. About a third of America’s population has now been warned of dangerous temperatures by the country’s weather service. Meteorologists predicted that next week temperatures in Italy could climb to 49°C, which would be the hottest recorded in Europe. Japan and China both issued heat alerts, while South Korea scrambled to save people trapped after torrential rains.

Petrol taxes in Turkey tripled, increasing prices at the pump by around 20%. The move is an attempt to refill government coffers, which have been depleted by expensive giveaways made by President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in his reelection campaign and a disastrous earthquake in February. Turks’ wallets have already been battered by sky-high inflation because of ultra-loose monetary policy—a strategy the government has only recently abandoned.

The prime minister of Iraq began an official visit to Syria—the first in over a decade. Mohammed Al-Sudani was due to talk to Bashar al-Assad, the Syrian president, about preventing drugs and Islamic State militants from moving between the countries. Having been shunned by other Arab leaders since Syria’s civil war began in 2011, Mr Assad is now returning to the diplomatic fold: earlier this year Syria was invited to rejoin the Arab League.

Nelson Chamisa, the leader of Zimbabwe’s main opposition, launched his party’s campaign—and his own presidential bid—for elections due in late August. A free and fair contest is doubtful: the ruling Zanu-PF, led by Emmerson Mnangagwa, has banned or broken up dozens of Mr Chamisa’s rallies, including one last Sunday. Mr Chamisa is one of ten registered candidates challenging Mr Mnangagwa.

Janet Yellen, America’s treasury secretary, said that the “single best thing for the global economy” would be helping Ukraine to end its war against Russia. Ms Yellen made the remarks ahead of a meeting of the finance ministers of the G20, a club of the world’s largest economies, which begins in India on Monday. Ms Yellen also recommended restructuring poor countries’ debt.

Jane Birkin, an English-French singer and actress, died in Paris aged 76. She achieved notoriety in 1969 with “Je t’aime…moi non plus”, a steamy (and controversial) number that laid her breathy vocals over the crooning of Serge Gainsbourg, her older lover. Her acting credits included “Blow-Up” and “Death on the Nile”. Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, called Ms Birkin a “French icon”.

Figure of the day: $6bn, the annual amount that we estimate bureaucracies around the world spend on paper and printing. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China’s economy is cooling down
When Janet Yellen, America’s treasury secretary, visited Beijing this month she did her bit for the local hospitality industry. Ms Yellen dined with her team at a restaurant that subsequently unveiled a new menu in her honour. She also hosted a lunch with a group of female economists (including Liu Qian of The Economist Group). Catering has been a bright spot since China dropped its pandemic controls at the end of 2022. But other parts of the economy are faltering.

Official figures, released on Monday, are likely to show that China’s GDP grew little between the first and second quarters of 2023. (Growth will appear much stronger in comparison with April-June 2022, when lockdowns crippled the economy.) Many observers have been hankering for a dollop of infrastructure stimulus from the government. They now hope a detailed plan will emerge from the next Politburo meeting at the end of July. But the government is proceeding cautiously. This establishment likes to leave its guests wanting more.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Salvaging the Black Sea grain deal
In July 2022 Russia agreed to allow Ukraine to resume grain exports through its Black Sea ports. Implementation of the deal has been patchy, with repeated reports of Russian blockades. Even so, millions of tonnes of food has flowed to hungry nations, helping to tame global food prices. But the agreement’s latest extension expires on Monday.

Vladimir Putin has refused to commit to a renewal, blaming Western sanctions for restricting shipments of Russian grain and fertiliser. The UN—which brokered the pact along with Turkey—has offered to facilitate Russian exports, to little avail. Most eyes are thus trained on Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the Turkish president, whose relationship with Mr Putin helped clinch the original deal. The recently re-elected Mr Erdogan has lately tilted towards his Western allies, notably by dropping his opposition to Sweden’s NATO bid. On Friday he claimed that he and Mr Putin were on “the same page” about the grain deal. But the Kremlin has issued no such reassurances.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
How to finance the green transition
On Monday finance ministers and central bankers from the G20, a club of the world’s largest economies, will convene in Gandhinagar, an Indian city named after the country’s founding father. The agenda set out by India, which holds the G20 presidency, is appropriately ambitious. The two days of talks are meant to cover everything from cross-border regulations for cryptocurrencies to a global deal on corporate taxation.

But one issue will dominate: how to help developing economies transition from fossil fuels. A group of economists—led by Lawrence Summers, a former secretary of America’s treasury—will offer proposals to make international lenders like the IMF and World Bank greener and more efficient. But mere streamlining is not enough for poor countries, who argue that far bigger pots of money are required to meet their needs. The risk is that the meeting will expose the gulf between the rich and poor worlds’ ideas of how global financing for the climate transition should work.


PHOTO: AP
“No Labels” targets American centrists
America is an unhappy place for political moderates. President Joe Biden may not appear a partisan warrior but his policies, and those of the Democratic Party, have been drifting leftwards. Republicans, spearheaded by Donald Trump, are aggrieved and increasingly extreme. More than half of Americans want a credible third option.

Enter No Labels, a bipartisan group founded in 2010. On Monday the organisation will hold a town hall in New Hampshire featuring Joe Manchin, a centrist Democratic senator, and Jon Huntsman, a moderate Republican and former governor of Utah. The event may presage a presidential ticket similarly featuring one Democrat and one Republican, to be announced next spring.

Much of No Labels’ platform seems sensible, such as cuts to entitlement programmes (many of which are headed for insolvency), or citizenship for immigrants brought to America as children. But if No Labels scoops up moderate voters who might otherwise spring for Mr Biden, Democrats fear that it could aid Mr Trump’s bid for a second term—the least sensible outcome of all.


PHOTO: AFP
Bruce Springsteen’s time-warping tour
Halfway through a ten-month tour of Europe and North America, Bruce Springsteen, at 73, is still performing as though his life depends on it. The fight against the remorselessness of time is a central theme in his music, and one which perhaps explains its longevity. Mr Springsteen’s songs cannot grow old because they were born old: concerned with aftermath rather than action, he spends far more time looking back to the past than imagining the future.

This brand of ready-made nostalgia has proved popular everywhere, and this week Mr Springsteen will play venues in Austria and Germany. His European fans may never have navigated the swamps of Jersey, driven 800 miles to Darlington county or worked at the rug mill across the railroad tracks. But they have all looked back with fondness or regret. “Tonight”, Mr Springsteen sings, “I’m ready to grow young again”. The greying devotees in t-shirts from tours of yore will feel the same way.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Nephritis is a disease associated with which organ?

Well-timed silence hath more eloquence than speech.

Martin Tupper
