The world in brief
August 31, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The Kremlin said a Russian investigation into the plane crash that killed Yevgeny Prigozhin, the boss of the Wagner Group, a mercenary outfit, and nine others last week would consider the possibility that it was downed deliberately. It is the first time the Kremlin has referred to assassination as a potential cause. The spokesperson said there would be no question of an international investigation. Meanwhile Russia accused Ukraine of launching strikes on targets in six Russian regions, in what appears to be the biggest aerial assault on Russian territory since the war began.

Country Garden, one of the world’s largest homebuilders, posted a record loss of 51.5bn yuan ($7bn) in the first six months of 2023, warning that it could default on its debt. The beleaguered Chinese developer missed $22.5m in coupon payments on August 6th. China’s property sector is in crisis: sales among the 100 biggest developers fell by 33% in July compared with a year earlier.

Hurricane Idalia made landfall, slamming into Florida and moving on to south-east Georgia. Those two states, plus North Carolina and South Carolina, have declared states of emergency. Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor, deployed the National Guard and asked residents in low-lying areas to evacuate. A 100-year-old oak tree fell on Mr DeSantis’s own house, the governor’s mansion; no one was injured.

Switzerland unveiled proposals to tighten its money-laundering laws as it seeks to shake off international criticism for its alleged role in facilitating sanctions evasion and other financial improprieties. The measures, announced by Karin Keller-Sutter, the finance minister, include introducing a beneficial-ownership register for companies. Switzerland’s banks hold some $2.4trn in foreign assets.

Gabon’s president, Ali Bongo, appealed for international support while under house arrest. He had declared victory in a presidential vote on Saturday, but army officers claimed to have taken power shortly after his re-election. Mr Bongo has run the west African country since 2009, following his despotic father, Omar Bongo.

CNN announced that Mark Thompson, a former chief executive of the New York Times and director-general of the BBC, will become its chief executive and chairman. The American cable-news network has suffered a decline in ratings and profits in recent years; its former chief executive, Chris Licht, left in June after just 13 months in charge. Mr Thompson will take up his post in October.

Britain’s foreign secretary, James Cleverly, met with Chinese leaders during the first visit to Beijing by a high-ranking British official in five years. He declared Britain “open for business” and said it would be a mistake to try to isolate China, which is the world’s second-largest economy. Earlier Mr Cleverly pledged to raise human-rights concerns during the meetings.

Figure of the day: 12,500, the number of nuclear warheads worldwide—down from 70,400 in 1986. Read the full story.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
India’s resilient growth
Earlier this year India’s government launched a capital spending splurge with much fanfare. On Thursday some of the early returns on that investment will be revealed when GDP figures for the first quarter of its fiscal year are released.

Economists believe that real growth jumped to 7.9% year on year, from 6.1% in the previous quarter. That was partly driven by a boom in construction, which has benefitted from the increase in public investment. Services output, usually the biggest component of economic growth in India, was probably also robust.

But some risks loom. Erratic weather has hindered agricultural output, and caused food prices to surge. That is expected to squeeze demand and drag down growth—but only a bit. Overall growth for the 2023-24 fiscal year is still expected to exceed 6%. If it does, India will remain the world’s fastest-growing big economy, according to the IMF.



PHOTO: AP
Governing Jammu & Kashmir
On Thursday India’s government is due at the Supreme Court’s request to announce a timeline for restoring statehood to Jammu & Kashmir. In 2019 the government of Narendra Modi, the prime minister, carved India’s only Muslim-majority state into two “union territories”, to be ruled from Delhi. It also cut phone lines and the internet for months, and arrested thousands of Kashmiri politicians and intellectuals. It defended the measures as a way to improve security and spur development in the restive region, which is also claimed by Pakistan.

The Supreme Court is hearing petitions challenging the constitutionality of the carve-up and the revocation of Kashmir’s special status, which included the right to stop outsiders from buying land. Kashmir has not had an elected assembly since 2018. On Tuesday the chief justice reminded the government that it was important to restore democracy there. The government has promised to do so when the situation becomes “normal”. But it is sure to reserve the right to define what normality means.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Republicans divided over Ukraine
Mike Pence’s faltering presidential campaign, which visits Iowa on Thursday, has been re-energised after he clocked the most speaking time in last week’s crowded Republican primary debate. In addition to boosting some underdogs, the debate highlighted a growing faultline among GOP contenders. Vivek Ramaswamy, one of Mr Pence’s rivals, attacked the former vice-president for visiting Kyiv in June, likening the trip to a “pilgrimage” to visit his “pope”, Ukraine’s president, Volodmyr Zelensky. That will have gone down well with the growing number of Republicans who are questioning America’s support for Ukraine, which has already cost $75bn.

The party’s leaders in the Senate believe that keeping money flowing to Ukraine bolsters America’s security. Right-wingers in the Republican-controlled House of Representatives gripe that the aid comes at the expense of domestic priorities. If this flank refuses to support more emergency spending for Ukraine, Republican leaders may be forced to turn to Democrats to approve it. Republican unity will be tested soon: President Joe Biden hopes to authorise another $24bn.


PHOTO: ALAMY
European interest rates near their peak
The good news is that the rate of inflation in the euro zone is on its way down. The bad news is that the economy is too, with surveys showing the bloc nearing recession. On September 14th the European Central Bank must decide whether to raise interest rates again. August’s inflation data, released on Thursday, will be critical.

Doves worry that the economy is weakening too fast. But hawks point out that the core inflation rate, at 5.5% in July, is still way above the 2% target for overall inflation. August is unlikely to offer much reprieve there, with data from Germany and Spain showing core inflation to be stubborn. Worse, fuel prices may also have pushed headline inflation a bit higher. Wage growth also remains high and has just accelerated in Italy, where it had previously been lagging behind. A compromise could see the ECB pause rate hikes next month, and reconsider in October.


PHOTO: PENGUIN PRESS
Celebrating Chinese food
In China, banquets often end with broth. This may seem odd to Westerners, who tend to prefer sweets at a meal’s close. But, as Fuchsia Dunlop, an English food writer, explains in an authoritative book released in Britain on Thursday, stock—simple, austere, perfect—is an ideal conclusion to a lavish meal.

“Invitation to a Banquet” is Ms Dunlop’s seventh book. Unlike those for which she is best-known, including “The Food of Sichuan”, this is not a cookbook. Instead, it uses 30 dishes to illuminate different aspects of Chinese cuisine and, in turn, Chinese life.

Readers will learn how and why Chinese chefs have long prized unusual ingredients, such as jellyfish, gizzards and the bitter pith of a giant citrus fruit. More importantly, they will learn how central food is to Chinese life and culture. In a delighted and expansive rather than chauvinistic way, Ms Dunlop makes a compelling case for the superiority of Chinese cuisine.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: What is the famous phrase used to refer to the speech given by Martin Luther King in August 1963 at the end of a March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom?

Wednesday: What two word term is often used to describe the period of civil conflict in Northern Ireland from the late 1960s to 1998?

Development is a series of rebirths.

Maria Montessori
