The world in brief
April 4, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

New York City’s mayor, Eric Adams, warned those protesting against Donald Trump’s arraignment to “be on [their] best behaviour” while in town. They include the right-wing congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene, who is appearing at a rally on Tuesday. Mr Trump left Florida in his private plane; he is expected to appear in court in Manhattan on Tuesday.

Russian investigators released footage—likely taped under duress—of 26-year-old Daria Trepova in which she admits leaving a hidden bomb in a St Petersburg café, albeit unknowingly. The blast killed a pro-Ukraine war blogger, who went by the name Vladlen Tatarsky, and injured over 30 others. Russian antiterrorism claimed Ukrainian intelligence was behind the explosion; Kyiv has denied involvement and blamed “domestic terrorism”.

America’s Federal Trade Commission ordered Illumina, a gene-sequencing firm, to unwind its merger with Grail, a cancer-detection startup that it acquired for $7bn. Trustbusters argue that the tie-up will stifle competition among firms that test for cancer; they overturned a judge’s ruling in Illumina’s favour. Illumina said it would appeal against the FTC’s decision in federal court.

Kevin McCarthy, America’s House speaker, will meet with Tsai Ing-wen, Taiwan’s president, in California on Wednesday—despite China’s pledge to “resolutely fight back” should such a meeting go ahead. China claims Taiwan, which is self-governing and democratic, as part of its territory. The meeting is likely to inflame Sino-American tensions, which are increasingly fraught.

Kosovo’s former president Hashim Thaci pleaded “not guilty” to charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity as his trial began before a special tribunal in The Hague. The charges—which include murder and enforced disappearance—date from Kosovo’s fight for independence from Serbia in 1998-99. Thousands of people in Kosovo took to the streets on Sunday to show support for Mr Thaci.

NASA revealed the four astronauts set to travel around the Moon in 2024. The crew—which includes the first female, black, and Canadian astronauts on a lunar mission—would be the first to fly near the Moon in over 50 years. NASA will attempt a surface landing on a separate, later expedition; it aims to establish a long-term presence on the Moon, and eventually Mars.

World Wrestling Entertainment is merging with Endeavor, the owner of its competitor Ultimate Fighting Championship, to create a live sports entertainment company worth over $21bn. Endeavor shareholders will own 51% of the new company, which will be led by Ari Emanuel, chief executive of Endeavor. Its shares were down 0.7% as the market opened, while shares of WWE fell 8% on the announcement.

Fact of the day: 122, the number of countries condemning Russia, down from 131 a year ago. Read the full story here.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Finland joins NATO
As NATO ministers gather for talks on Tuesday, for the first time a Finnish flag will flutter above the organisation’s headquarters in Brussels. After Turkey lifted its veto on Thursday, Finland can become the 31st member of the military alliance. But even if American spy planes are already flying over Lapland, neighbouring Sweden’s bid is in limbo because Hungary and Turkey remain opposed. Swedish officials say they are confident of securing membership before a summit in Lithuania in July.

The ministers are expected to focus on Ukraine, with a major Ukrainian counter-offensive expected within weeks. Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary-general, will also convene a meeting of the NATO-Ukraine Commission on the sidelines, overriding a veto from Hungary, whose Russophile government has blocked such meetings since 2017. NATO is adamant that the door to Ukraine’s membership remains open. “Allies stand by their 2008 decision that Ukraine will become a member of NATO,” declared Javier Colomina, a NATO deputy-assistant secretary-general, in Kyiv on Friday.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A former president hands himself in
Donald Trump is well acquainted with legal proceedings, from bankruptcy filings to impeachment hearings. On Tuesday afternoon he is expected to attend his arraignment and surrender himself for arrest in New York. No former American president has ever faced criminal charges.

A Manhattan grand jury indicted Mr Trump on March 30th. The exact charges will be unsealed on Tuesday, but they are believed to be related to hush-money paid to an adult film star. Mr Trump, who denies any wrongdoing, has called the investigation a “witch hunt” and Manhattan’s district attorney “corrupt”. He says he will be denied a fair trial.

Emotions are running high. Trump supporters intend to protest at a park near the courthouse; New York’s police have erected a barricaded fortress around the area. Mr Trump once tweeted that “what separates the winners from the losers is how a person reacts to each new twist of fate”. The world awaits his reaction to this one.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
A monetary dilemma in Australia
Australia’s Reserve Bank faces a tough call on Tuesday, when it meets to decide whether to raise interest rates for the 11th consecutive time. On the one hand, inflation is cooling faster than expected. Annual price rises dropped to 6.8% in February, down from 8.4% in December. On the other hand, that is still well above the bank’s target of 2-3%, and unemployment now stands at 3.5%, the lowest rate in almost half a century. Regulators insist that Australia’s banks are “among the strongest and most resilient in the world”. That could reassure the monetary authorities that a further interest-rate rise would not risk undermining financial stability and choking off business activity.

So which way will the central bank tip? Australia’s four big private banks are divided over whether it will pause, or lift rates by one-quarter of a percentage point to 3.85%. Either way, rates are probably nearing their peak.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
How robust is Mexico’s electoral watchdog?
On Tuesday four new board members take their seats on Mexico’s electoral body, the National Electoral Institute (INE). One will be its president. The appointees will be closely watched, because INE is in the firing line of Andrés Manuel López Obrador, Mexico’s president. A package of laws passed at the end of February cut the body’s funding and size, weakening its ability to run and monitor elections. Critics see this as part of a wider assault on the independent organisations that are supposed to keep executive power in check.

The INE organises ballots, gives voters ID cards and upholds electoral law. It is thus crucial to fair elections in Mexico, which became a true democracy only in 2000. Some analysts think the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party has sought to influence the new appointments by putting their own people on the committee in charge of selecting candidates, who were then voted on by Mexico’s congress. The behaviour of the new counsellors—who will serve until 2032—will hint at how well it can keep fulfilling that role. An early trial will be the election of two state governorships in June. But the real test comes with next year’s presidential election.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Chicago’s mayoral runoff
Is it a fight between the teachers’ union and the police union? Or is it, as one candidate puts it, a fight between “black labour and white wealth”? Voters in the Windy City will pick a new mayor on Tuesday. The two candidates in the runoff election, though both Democrats, could not be more different.

Paul Vallas is a white conservative-leaning bureaucrat. He has received enthusiastic Republican support, perhaps in part because of his links with the police union. (His primary policy idea is to hire more officers.) Opposing him is Brandon Johnson, a charismatic black former public-school teacher, who has called defunding the police a “real political goal”. He is backed by the teachers’ union.

Mr Johnson was the runner-up in the first round, and polling still gives Mr Vallas a slight edge in the run-off. As the election cuts across racial, class and ideological boundaries, Democratic politicians across America will be watching the outcome closely.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Tuesday: In what well-known site can tourists see the Mona Lisa and the Venus de Milo?

Monday: Which famous landmark, in the centre of Rome, was also known as the Flavian Amphitheatre?

Without craftsmanship, inspiration is a mere reed shaken in the wind.

Johannes Brahms
