The world in brief
May 15, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Turks voted in their country’s presidential election. Polls had suggested that the increasingly autocratic president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, could lose to Kemal Kilicdaroglu, who represents an alliance of parties. Both sides claimed to be in the lead, but with around 90% of the votes counted neither candidate looked likely to reach the 50% threshold required to avoid a run-off later this month.

Volodymyr Zelensky arrived in Germany, his first visit to the country since the Russian invasion of his country began. In a meeting with the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, Ukraine’s president thanked Germany for being a “true friend”, and said that with more Western support a Russian defeat would be “irreversible”. The German government announced €2.7bn ($2.95bn) of military aid for Ukraine ahead of his arrival. Earlier, Mr Zelensky met Italy’s prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, in Rome. Despite some members of her right-wing coalition having expressed pro-Kremlin views, Ms Meloni has pledged her government’s support for Ukraine.

Voters in Thailand’s general election voters emphatically rejected the military-backed government. Young people in particular turned away from the prime minister, Prayuth Chan-ocha, a former general who seized power in a coup in 2014. His leadership has been defined by economic incompetence and corruption. The two largest parties, Move Forward and Pheu Thai, will probably enter coalition talks in the coming weeks, though the military establishment may not cede power graciously.

Cyclone Mocha hit the coasts of Bangladesh and Myanmar. Winds gusting at 215km per hour and storm surges almost 4 metres higher than the normal tide are expected. In Bangladesh almost 500,000 people have already been evacuated to safer areas. The low-lying area of Cox’s Bazar, home to 1m Rohingya refugees from Myanmar, is particularly vulnerable.

Further heavy fighting was reported in the Sudanese capital, Khartoum, even though both sides–the army and the Rapid Support Forces, a militia–agreed on Thursday to a “declaration of principles” to protect civilians and secure humanitarian access. The Darfur Bar Association reported that more than 100 people had been killed in fighting in the western region of Darfur on Friday and Saturday.

The new boss of Twitter spoke publicly for the first time since taking charge of the social-media platform on Friday. In a tweet Linda Yaccarino said that she had been inspired by the vision of Elon Musk, Twitter’s owner, to “transform” the company. Twitter has suffered a big loss of advertising revenue since Mr Musk bought the business for $44bn last year.

Sweden won the Eurovision Song Contest, a staggeringly popular cheesefest. Loreen sang the winning entry, “Tattoo”, the second time she has triumphed at the competition. Sweden has now prevailed in the annual contest a record-equalling seven times. Its first success came in 1974 with a then-obscure band named ABBA.

Fact of the day: 212,000, the number of same-sex-couple families in Britain in 2019. Read the full story.


PHOTO: ALAMY
America and China joust over Sri Lanka’s debts
Sri Lanka is not a large economy. Its GDP is only 0.3% of America’s and 0.5% of China’s. Yet it has become a test case for the global financial architecture in an age of superpower rivalry. American officials urge China to relieve promptly the country’s unpayable debts. China has argued that the World Bank, dominated by America, should also take a hit on its loans.

Some progress has recently been made. The IMF, which cannot lend to countries with unsustainable debt, approved a $3bn loan to Sri Lanka in March after China assured the fund that it would offer enough relief. On Monday a senior IMF official will conclude his visit to the island nation to assess progress. One sticking point now seems to be a familiar dispute between foreign and local bondholders. The new cold war has added a fresh obstacle to debt relief. But there are plenty of older obstacles, too.


PHOTO: REUTERS
The president says “Choose France”
Emmanuel Macron will host a summit in Versailles on Monday for more than 200 world business leaders to encourage them to invest in his country. New projects worth €13bn ($14bn) will be announced.The event comes at a time when the president is making a push for a new industrial policy, to curb dependence on long supply chains and accelerate the green transition, both at home and in Europe.

On Thursday he called for France to stop subsidising the purchase of electric cars made outside Europe, in response to massive state support for the sector in both America and China. On the next day Mr Macron visited the port city of Dunkirk, where ProLogium, a Taiwanese firm, is building a €5.2bn electric-battery factory–just the sort of new investment he is after. This focus on factories and jobs is good for France. But it’s also a way for Mr Macron to move the national conversation on after months of protests against his pension reform.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
Sudan’s agony is set to continue
Peace talks to end Sudan’s month-long civil war resumed on Sunday in Saudi Arabia. Few expect them to succeed. After weeks of fighting for control of the capital, Khartoum, neither the Sudanese Armed Forces, the national army, nor the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary group led by Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo (a warlord known as Hemedti), has gained a decisive advantage. And neither is likely to back down just yet.

So the misery of Sudan’s civilians is set to continue. More than 750 people have already been killed, and more than 200,000 have fled to neighbouring countries. In Khartoum RSF troops have dug themselves into residential districts while the SAF’s fighter jets pummel them from the sky. Four days of talks in Jeddah last week produced only a “declaration of principles” for the armies to follow, such as allowing aid to reach civilians. But as both sides continue to deploy more troops to the capital, even this modest agreement will become ever harder to implement.



PHOTO: ALAMY
China’s diplomatic push on Ukraine
Li Hui, China’s special representative on Eurasian affairs, will visit Ukraine, Russia and other European countries beginning on Monday. Xi Jinping, China’s president, promised to dispatch the envoy during a phone call with his Ukrainian counterpart, Volodymyr Zelensky, in April. It was the first time the two leaders had talked since Russia invaded Ukraine last year. Lately, though, China has ramped up its diplomatic efforts surrounding the conflict.

Mr Li was the Chinese ambassador in Moscow from 2009 to 2019, so he is well versed in Russian politics. Germany, France and Poland are also on his itinerary. There are reasons to be sceptical of China’s efforts. A12-point peace plan it presented in February merely echoed demands made by the Kremlin. There have been no signs since then that Mr Xi is willing to exert more pressure on his “best friend” Vladmir Putin. Critics therefore question whether China is serious about being a peacemaker, or just posing as one.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A new Martin Luther King biography
The reverence with which Americans of all political stripes regard Martin Luther King today obscures how divisive and unpopular he was in his time. Patriotic but unsparing in his criticism of America, struggling to balance faith in his countrymen with growing pessimism about his country’s ability to overcome its demons, he was a thorny and demanding thinker and activist. Jonathan Eig’s magnificent new biography, “King: A Life”, is a welcome effort to wrestle with him in all of his complexity.

Using a combination of political shrewdness, moral suasion and physical courage, he led the most successful pressure campaign in American history, inspiring sweeping federal laws that banned discrimination in public accommodation, voting and housing. The last came in 1968, just a week after a bullet ended his life. For King, ending segregation was not his movement’s end but its beginning: he sought brotherhood and equality. Those goals are fiendishly difficult to achieve through policy, but still worth striving for.


Daily Quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll p’ick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which stretch of water between the Malay peninsula and Sumatra is the main shipping lane between the Indian and Pacific oceans?

We turn not older with years, but newer every day.

Emily Dickinson
