The world in brief
June 24, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Yevgeny Prigozhin, the head of the Wagner mercenary group, said his troops had left Ukraine, crossed back into Russia and were prepared to enter Moscow. Wagner forces are already on the streets of Rostov, a southern Russian town, he said. The Kremlin accused him of mutiny and opened a criminal case against him. Mr Prigozhin’s extraordinary gambit came after he accused the Russian army of attacking his training camps and killing “an enormous amount” of his troops. The alleged missile strikes (which Russia’s defence ministry denies) came after he said in a video on Telegram that Russia’s army leaders had lied to the country’s president, Vladimir Putin, and its people about the rationale for war. Mr Prigozhin has been feuding with the army’s leaders for months.

America and India signed several defence and technology deals as their leaders hailed a new era in bilateral relations. Speaking at a state dinner hosted for Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, President Joe Biden described the two countries as “great friends and…great powers”. Earlier Mr Modi addressed Congress and fielded two questions, a rarity for the leader, at a press conference.

Germany’s parliament approved large-scale reforms of the country’s immigration system, loosening entry requirements for skilled workers from outside the European Union and allowing qualified refugees to join the workforce before the approval of their asylum status. The country faces an acute labour shortage, with open vacancies approaching 2m, according to government estimates.

The European Union adopted more sanctions against Russia, its eleventh such package since the invasion of Ukraine began. The latest list, which saw some 104 individuals and organisations added, focuses on middlemen that help Russia get around export controls and other measures. The companies added come from countries such as Iran, Syria and Uzbekistan, and include three based in Hong Kong.

Growth in euro-zone manufacturing and services activity slowed this month, raising concerns about the health of the bloc’s economy. The HCOB flash composite purchasing managers’ index, a closely watched survey, fell from 52.8 in May to 50.3 in June. The news raised the possibility of a further contraction in euro-zone GDP, after two successive quarters of decline.

The Turkish lira sank to a new record low despite the central bank raising interest rates by 6.5 percentage points. The move reversed President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s unconventional policy of lowering rates to tackle the country’s high inflation, but analysts had expected a bigger hike. Despite the bank promising more interest-rates rises, the lira fell to 24.97 against the dollar on Friday.

The number of people suffering from diabetes could rise to 1.3bn by 2050, more than double the current count of 530m, according to a study published in the Lancet. The surge will be driven by rising obesity rates and ageing populations. Countries in north Africa, the Middle East and Latin America are expected to be hit the hardest.

An earlier edition of The World in Brief suggested that a press conference which President Joe Biden and Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, took part in on Thursday was the first the Indian leader had faced since taking office. This was not the case. Sorry.

Word of the week: Diia, the Ukrainian word for “action” and the name of a government-services app in the country. Read the full story.


PHOTO: CQ-ROLL CALL, INC VIA GETTY IMAG
America’s abortion battle
One year ago America’s Supreme Court decided, in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organisation, to let states ban abortion, overturning decades-old precedent set in Roe v Wade. Fourteen states now have outright bans; six others outlaw the procedure at later stages of pregnancy.

The decision was a huge victory for opponents of abortion, but many in the movement see their work as far from finished. Although the number of abortions has fallen, abortion remains legal in many states. Where it is outlawed, women drive to out-of-state clinics or buy pills online. Anti-abortion activists with differing strategies—there are incrementalist and radical camps—are competing to lead the movement into its next phase.

Abortion-rights advocates, meanwhile, have gained momentum in the past year. Nearly 70% of Americans now say they support legal abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy; in 2018, just 60% did. Some states have made access to abortion a constitutional right. To many on the left, Dobbs is the galvanising force that Roe was on the right.


PHOTO: KATHERINE ANNE ROSE / GUARDIAN /
Scottish nationalists try to regroup
On Saturday members of the Scottish National Party meet in Dundee. The gathering, first announced in December, was intended to set out a “clear pathway” to independence after Britain’s Supreme Court ruled that the Scottish Parliament lacked the authority to hold a referendum. In a vote in 2014 Scots rejected independence by 55% to 45%; the British government refuses to authorise a second referendum.

The conference, originally scheduled for March, was postponed after Nicola Sturgeon resigned as Scotland’s first minister after more than eight years in power. A messy leadership contest followed. Humza Yousaf, an unremarkable veteran minister, won it. Then Ms Sturgeon and her husband, Peter Murrell, were arrested in connection with more than £600,000 ($760,000) of missing party funds. Neither has been charged, but the SNP has slumped in the polls. A recent survey suggests that Labour will surpass it to become the largest party in Scotland at the next British general election. The path to independence is getting ever harder.


PHOTO: BLOOMBERG VIA GETTY IMAGES
Argentina’s unpredictable election season
Saturday marks the start of election season in Argentina: it is the deadline for candidates to register to campaign for the country’s presidency. Those who win their parties’ backing in primaries on August 13th will compete in the first round of the presidential election on October 22nd.

This year things are unusually unpredictable. For almost eight decades, Argentina has been dominated by Peronism, a populist movement. But under the current Peronist administration annual inflation has reached 114%, the third-highest in the world. The centre-right opposition, Juntos por el Cambio (“Together for Change” or JxC), is leading the polls. Behind it—and neck-and-neck with the Peronists—is La Libertad Avanza (“Freedom Advances”), the party of Javier Milei, a libertarian congressman. He offers radical solutions to Argentina’s malaise, including swapping pesos for dollars and eliminating the central bank. General Juan Domingo Perón, the founder of Peronism, must be turning in his grave.



PHOTO: AFP VIA GETTY IMAGES
The Beyoncé effect
In May Sweden’s annual inflation rate was slightly higher than expected, at 9.7%. At least one economist blamed Beyoncé. Last month her “Renaissance” tour opened in Stockholm, drawing legions of fans. Hotel prices rose by 8.7% from the previous month. Now some fear a remix featuring “The Boss”. Starting on Saturday Bruce Springsteen will make several appearances in Gothenburg.

A weak krona makes a trip to Sweden comparatively cheap for foreigners. Indeed that may have helped lure Beyoncé fans from abroad, especially from America. Her concerts there are much more expensive than in Sweden, because ticket sellers charge high fees and regulation of scalpers is lax.

But the ardour of the BeyHive is unusual. Other singers, Mr Springsteen included, are less in demand. As the economist who attributed May’s inflation surprise to Beyoncé told CNN: “What we saw with [her] was a little bit special.”


PHOTO: THE WASHINGTON POST VIA GETTY IM
Weekend profile: Major General Kyrylo Budanov, Ukraine’s spymaster
It takes a certain amount of fear to paralyse seasoned military-intelligence officers. But a Russian attack on their headquarters in Kyiv in March 2022 crossed that threshold. The officers recall “terror” as missiles landed, windows popped and ramshackle buildings crumbled at the edges. Moments later the boss emerged. “Everything is fine,” they remember Major General Kyrylo Budanov grunting, before he ordered them to get back to work.

Volodymyr Zelensky’s decision in 2020 to promote a little-known commander to head Ukraine’s main directorate of intelligence—HUR—surprised many. But in security circles the 37-year-old was already legendary. In one near-mythic feat in 2016, General Budanov led a raid to destroy helicopters in the backyard of Russia’s security service in Crimea. On the way out his team encountered Russian special forces, and killed several.

But it was during Russia’s full-scale invasion he came into his own. He masterminded operations that stopped the Russian advance into Kyiv. He sent supply-and-rescue helicopters into besieged Mariupol. As the architect of increasingly brazen operations within Russia, he has enraged the Kremlin. Aides say there have been “at least ten” attempts on his life. Following the latest, in May, pro-Kremlin media reported that General Budanov had been evacuated to Germany and put into a coma. The Economist can refute that claim.

Even among Western partners his bravado is not universally welcomed. Leaked documents show that the CIA intervened to stop the general from ordering an attack on Moscow, for fears of provoking a nuclear escalation. He downplays that threat.

A confidant of the president, General Budanov is understood to be playing an ever-bigger role in behind-the-scenes peace negotiations. Sources say he participates in secret talks with the Chinese, and that he has also been in contact with Yevgeny Prigozhin, the leader of Russia’s mercenary Wagner outfit. In an interview with The Economist it was clear that the country’s youngest-ever spymaster has been thinking hard about postwar Ukraine. His colleagues say they are convinced he is destined for a big political role once peace comes—if he lives that long.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Spin doctor’s press around heathen is source of tension (12)

1 across No Sir! Put back container for pen (6)

2 across Corruption at the heart of congress was lifted (5)

3 across Engineer ran the capital city (6)

Factual clues

1 down What Kim Jong Un’s sister is for North Korea (12)

1 across Where Hunter Biden will avoid going (6)

2 across Something Ukraine is trying to reduce (5)

3 across One place where enthusiasm for the Iran nuclear deal seems to have waned (6)



The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Daria Messerschmidt, Düsseldorf, Germany

Chelsea Winston-Rosa, Phoenix, Arizona, United States

Youssef Fadel, Cairo, Egypt

They all gave the correct answers of The Phantom of the Opera, Bob Hope, The Return of the Native, Empire State Building and the Space Force. The theme is Star Wars movies; The Phantom Menace; A New Hope; Return of the Jedi; The Empire Strikes Back and The Force Awakens

The questions were:

Monday: Which book by Gaston Leroux was adapted into a musical by Andrew Lloyd Webber?
Tuesday: Which famous comedian and film star died at the age of 100 in 2003?
Wednesday: Which Thomas Hardy novel features the characters Diggory Venn and Thomasin Yeobright?
Thursday: Which building was the tallest in the world between 1931 and 1970?
Friday: Which is the smallest and newest branch of the US armed services, established only in 2019?

He who thinks with difficulty believes with alacrity.

Ambrose Bierce
