The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 3, 2023
Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, met his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov for the first time since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The two spoke briefly on the sidelines of an acrimonious meeting of G20 foreign ministers. According to a State Department official, Mr Blinken reiterated his country’s support for Ukraine and said Russia should rejoin New START, a nuclear arms reduction treaty.

Protests took place across Greece sparked by the train crash on Tuesday that killed at least 57 people and injured scores more. Demonstrators blamed the government for failing to maintain the railways. In Athens, the capital, rioters clashed with police outside the headquarters of the company that manages Greece’s trains. Greek officials charged a stationmaster in the nearby city of Larissa of manslaughter by negligence.

Euro zone inflation slowed to 8.5% year-on-year in February, a 0.1% decrease from the previous month. The drop, mainly due to cheaper fuel, was less than expected; core inflation, which excludes volatile energy and food prices, rose by 0.3% to 5.6%. Stubbornly high inflation figures mean the ECB will likely continue to raise interest rates.

President Vladimir Putin said that Ukrainian “terrorists” attacked the Russian border regions of Bryansk. In a televised address, Mr Putin claimed that armed groups had shot at Russian civilians. An advisor to Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, dismissed the accusation as a “deliberate provocation” to justify Mr Putin’s invasion. An anti-Putin group of Russians, active in Ukraine, claimed responsibility for the attack but this has not been confirmed.

More than half of the world’s population, or 4bn people, could be overweight or obese by 2035, according to a new report by the World Obesity Federation, an NGO. That would be up from 38% of the world (or 2.6bn people) in 2020. Childhood obesity is growing most rapidly: at the current rate levels by 2035 could be double those of 2020.

Tesla announced plans to cut its car-assembly costs by half, putting it on the road to launching a much cheaper electric vehicle. At the firm’s first investor day, held at a factory in Texas, its boss Elon Musk offered little detail on when the model would be launched. Investors did not appear convinced; Tesla’s share price sank by more than 5% in after-market trading.

America approved the potential sale of weapons worth $619m to Taiwan, including anti-aircraft missiles and ammunition for F-16 fighter jets. The purchase will further inflame relations with China, whose war planes violated Taiwanese air space for the second day running on Thursday. China claims Taiwan as its territory and has repeatedly demanded that America stop selling arms to the self-governing island.

Fact of the day: $45trn, the total value of American housing. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Mr Scholz goes to Washington
Although brief, Olaf Scholz’s 24-hour visit to Washington on Friday could be testing. The German chancellor needs to charm President Joe Biden, who in January was forced to promise tanks to Ukraine because Mr Scholz had made this a condition for ending his own controversial block on sending German ones. If accused of foot-dragging, the chancellor may note that German aid to Ukraine—totalling €14bn ($14.83bn) so far—is second only to America’s.

But Mr Biden can counter that smaller, poorer NATO allies have spent far more generously to defend Europe in proportion to their GDP. Before his trip Mr Scholz insisted that Germany’s relations with America are better than ever. He echoed Mr Biden’s increasingly tough line on China. But new reports suggest that America may punish China with sanctions if it arms Russia. This could be too much for Mr Scholz. Germany’s top firms, shaken by the loss of Russia’s big market, are exposed in China, too.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Greece’s rail-crash disaster
On Saturday a stationmaster from Hellenic Train, the operator of Greece’s railways, faces a court hearing on manslaughter charges after at least 57 people died in a fiery crash near Larissa on Tuesday. A freight train collided with a high-speed express on Greece’s main rail link with central Europe. According to a fire-service official there is “virtually no hope” of rescuing more people from the wreckage. Dozens of family members converged on local hospitals to take DNA tests to identify victims.

Giorgos Gerapetritis, the newly appointed transport minister, will oversee an investigation into the disaster. Some experts have blamed a manual switching error at Larissa station that set the two trains on course for a head-on collision. Thanks to a years-long delay in upgrading the mainline to EU standards many stretches of track lack electronic signalling. The tragedy has incited sometimes violent protests throughout the country, and voters are likely to punish the ruling New Democracy party at a general election due by July.


PHOTO: ROPI
Flying high with Lufthansa
Lufthansa, Europe’s second-largest aviation group by number of passengers—it includes Austrian Airlines, SWISS, Eurowings and Brussels Airlines—will report results for last year on Friday. They are likely to be much rosier than those of the two preceding years. And after a loss in the last quarter of 2021, analysts are expecting a profit for the last quarter of 2022.

During the peaks of the covid-19 pandemic passenger travel dwindled so dramatically that in May 2020 the German government stepped in with a €9bn ($10bn) bail-out package. This included taking a 20% stake in the carrier, which it sold off in September last year. In anticipation of better times ahead, on Thursday the board announced an extension by five years of the contract of Carsten Spohr, Lufthansa’s CEO, who is himself a pilot, and Remco Steenbergen, his chief financial officer. It was the reward for steering the airline through maybe the toughest period in its history.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America’s fledgling property-market rebound
When mortgage rates soared last year, America’s housing market suffered, with transactions, prices and construction all slumping. In recent weeks, though, it has started to recover. New-home sales in January jumped to a ten-month high. That matters for the economy, because property is a bellwether of how America is coping amid high interest rates.

The next few months will show whether the property rebound is sustainable. Spring selling season is the sector’s busiest time of the year. The case for optimism is that America’s property market has found a floor. The case for pessimism is that when the Federal Reserve sees that such a rate-sensitive sector is shrugging off tight monetary policy, it may decide that it needs to be more hawkish. In that gloomier and regrettably more realistic scenario, the rebound will soon fade away, and property will be a harbinger of recession rather than recovery.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Hong Kong faces the music
Full-throated fun has been impossible in Hong Kong for 945 days. People out at clubs, concerts or for an evening stroll had to strap cloth around their mouths or face hefty fines. No longer. On Wednesday the territory scrapped one of the world’s longest-running mask mandates.

Officials were perhaps mindful of a looming public-relations disaster this weekend. Clockenflap, a three-day music festival drawing partygoers from across the region, will take place for the first time since 2019. The Wu-Tang Clan—legendary American rappers named from Hong Kong films—and other big bands are jetting in.

Can Hong Kong regain its position as one of Asia’s foremost cultural hubs after three years of self-imposed covid isolation and political repression? Some signs are positive. Clockenflap has sold out for the first time in its 15-year history. Further events are coming; next in March are Art Basel Hong Kong, an international art fair, and a popular rugby tournament.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which American author wrote the civil war book “The Red Badge of Courage”?

Friday: Which American singer wrote and performed the theme to the James Bond movie “Tomorrow Never Dies”?

Political questions are far too serious to be left to the politicians.

Hannah Arendt
