The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (23:43 GMT+1 / 06:43 Hong Kong)

Annual inflation in America eased slightly in July, dipping from 9.1% in June to 8.5%, though it is still close to America’s highest in four decades. There are hopes, however, that it has peaked: overall consumer prices stayed flat from June to July. Stockmarkets cheered. The Nasdaq composite index gained nearly 3% on the news, and closed more than 20% higher than its nadir in mid-June.

Donald Trump refused to answer questions under oath while being deposed by the New York state attorney-general as part of a civil investigation into his family’s business accounts. Mr Trump said in a statement that he had invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. The investigation runs parallel to one by the FBI allegedly related to Mr Trump’s activities after he left office.

China announced an end to military drills around Taiwan but said regular patrols would continue in the Taiwan Strait. Separately, China’s Taiwan Affairs Office published its first white paper on Taiwan in 22 years. Compared with older versions of the document from 1993 and 2000, the new paper drops China’s previous promise not to deploy its soldiers in Taiwan after it has been “reunified” with the mainland.

Softbank said it would reduce its stake in Alibaba, a Chinese e-commerce giant, by unloading $22bn-worth of shares. The Japanese investment group said its holdings in the company would shrink to 14.6% in September, down from 23.7% at the end of June. The decision came two days after Softbank posted its largest-ever quarterly loss, of $23.4bn, prompting Son Masayoshi, the firm’s boss, to say that “dramatic” cost-cutting was on the cards.

Federal prosecutors in America charged a member of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps with plotting to assassinate John Bolton, Donald Trump’s former national security adviser. American officials said the planned killing was probably intended as retaliation for the death of Qassem Suleimani, the head of the IRGC’s foreign-operations arm, whom America killed in 2020. The justice department said the suspect, Shahram Poursafi, is currently abroad.

Disney’s revenues soared by 26% in the latest quarter, thanks in large part to strong demand for its theme parks, which have bounced back from their pandemic doldrums with a vengeance. Disney+, the company’s streaming service, also added millions more subscribers than expected. Even so, Disney said it will raise its streaming prices to hedge against slower subscriber growth in future.

Early results from Kenya’s presidential election suggested a tight race between the two leading candidates, William Ruto, the deputy president, and Raila Odinga, the opposition leader. Turnout was low, and the election commission now has up to a week to declare the winner. Recent elections have been scarred by violence after the result was announced.

Fact of the day: 46%, the share of American teenagers who are “almost constantly” online. Read the full story.

Ukraine’s allies gather in Copenhagen

PHOTO: EPA
The Danish military will train Ukrainian soldiers in Britain. That announcement came ahead of a meeting of allies in Copenhagen on Thursday, hosted by the three countries. Defence ministers from 15 European countries, plus America and Canada, will discuss further military support for Ukraine.

The conference comes as Western aid continues to bolster Ukraine’s defences. On Monday America pledged a further $1bn in military assistance, including more ammunition for the HIMARS rocket launchers which have pounded Russian positions. The fighting in the east and south of Ukraine remains finely balanced, although Ukraine appears to be mustering forces for a counteroffensive to retake the occupied city of Kherson.

The conference highlights a second aspect of Vladimir Putin’s war. By invading Ukraine, Russia wished to stop any more countries joining NATO. But Finland and Sweden are now on the cusp of membership. Britain continues to play a vital role in European security, despite tensions with the EU. Mr Putin’s invasion has transformed Europe’s security architecture, just not as he would have hoped.

When the Chinese chips are down

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China’s most advanced chipmaker, Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation (SMIC), reports its second-quarter results on Thursday. Amid signs of a slowdown in the chip market they will be closely watched, by both investors and politicians.

Computer chips are important for everything from washing machines and cars to cruise missiles and fighter jets. China has long held ambitions to build a cutting-edge chips industry. But American sanctions, begun under Donald Trump and continued by President Joe Biden, are designed to deny China access to the latest chipmaking technology. In July it emerged that SMIC had worked out how to make advanced 7-nanometre chips. Smaller components mean better chips (though the figures bear little relation to the physical characteristics of the chips themselves). That puts SMIC about half a decade behind TSMC, a Taiwanese firm, and Samsung, a Korean one.

The significance of SMIC’s achievement is not yet clear. It may be that only some components on the new chips have been shrunk. And without access to the latest extreme-ultraviolet lithography tools, made in the Netherlands, it is unclear how much further SMIC can push its products.

An electric vehicle startup slows down

PHOTO: REUTERS
Rivian’s promise of powerful, green electric trucks was so thrilling that nearly 50,000 people placed an order before any had been delivered. The firm became a Wall Street sensation in 2021: its valuation zoomed above $100bn in the biggest IPO of the year. But its shares have crashed by nearly two-thirds this year. And its second-quarter earnings, due on Thursday, will demonstrate more braking than accelerating.

Rivian’s problems are familiar. Supply-chain woes and high inflation are leaving the company unable to meet sky-high demand. Other electric carmaking startups, such as Arrival and Lordstown Motors, are also struggling. Despite Rivian’s impressive order book, which has 90,000 customers waiting, in the first quarter of the year just 2,553 trucks rolled off its assembly line. It chalked up a $1.6bn loss. Now it is facing a cost crunch, obliging it to lay off 6% of its workforce.


Litigating golf’s civil war

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Two months ago a group of elite professional golfers broke away from the American-run PGA Tour to compete in LIV Golf, a lucrative series of tournaments bankrolled by the government of Saudi Arabia. Some of them resigned from the PGA Tour; others had their membership suspended. Before signing up to LIV nearly a dozen players had qualified to play in the PGA Tour’s FedEx Cup playoffs, which begin on Thursday in Tennessee, only to be banned by the Tour. Three of them contested the ban but on Wednesday a federal judge in America upheld it.

On August 3rd players in LIV who remain suspended by the PGA Tour filed an antitrust lawsuit against it, accusing it of behaving monopolistically and harming their careers. The PGA Tour denies this. The antitrust case could take up to two years to resolve. In the meantime, as the two tours run in parallel, the mutual enmity will only deepen.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which Australian conservationist and television personality was killed by a stingray in 2006?

Wednesday: Which novelist wrote “Heart of Darkness”, a book loosely adapted as the film “Apocalypse Now”?

My life is short. I can’t listen to banality.

V. S. Naipaul
