The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (05:54 GMT+1 London)

America’s Congress began hearings about the riots of January 6th 2021. A bipartisan committee set out to prove that the supporters of Donald Trump who stormed the Capitol were part of an “attempted coup”. Investigators argued that the Proud Boys, a far-right group, co-ordinated the attack against the Capitol police. And they demonstrated that Mr Trump, still the president at that time, had been advised by his daughter Ivanka and other close aides that he had lost the election fair and square. Separately, the FBI arrested Ryan Kelley, a Republican standing for governor in Michigan, on charges connected to the riot.

Three men, two British and one Moroccan, captured by pro-Russian forces in a disputed part of Ukraine were handed a death sentence. The Donetsk People’s Republic, a self-proclaimed republic in eastern Ukraine, has accused the men of being mercenaries. The British government says the men should be treated as prisoners of war. Separately, investigators in Russia said they have opened more than 1,100 cases into “crimes against peace” committed by the Ukrainian government, sparking fears this could set the stage for mass show trials.

Vladimir Putin said it was his “destiny” to “return and fortify” lost Russian territory, just as it had been Peter the Great’s. Russia’s 21st-century president lauded the tsar’s conquest of the Baltic coast in the 18th century: “he wasn’t taking anything away—he was returning it”. Moreover, Mr Putin said, when Peter the Great founded St Petersburg, “none of the countries of Europe recognised it as Russian.”

Factory-gate inflation in China slowed in May, to its lowest rate in more than a year. Producer prices rose by 6.4% year-on-year, well below forecasts, as global commodity prices eased and covid-19 restrictions reduced demand for steel, aluminium and other inputs. That in turn kept consumer-price inflation in check, at 2.1%. In Japan too, producer price inflation cooled in May after reaching a 41-year high in April.

Presidents Joe Biden and Jair Bolsonaro agreed to work together on several issues, including preventing further deforestation of the Brazilian Amazon. The pair were meeting for the first time at the Ninth Summit of the Americas in Los Angeles. Mr Bolsonaro, who had once deemed Mr Biden’s election victory “suspicious”, said Brazil has “a huge interest in getting closer and closer to the US”.

Iran began removing the monitoring equipment it was required to install under the 2015 nuclear deal, undermining attempts to revive the agreement. The move came in retaliation for a resolution on Wednesday from the International Atomic Energy Agency criticising Iran for failing to explain uranium traces found at three undeclared sites. The IAEA demanded that Iran engage with the watchdog “without delay”. Only China and Russia opposed the resolution.

Paris’s police chief, Didier Lallement, admitted that the policing of the Champions League final on May 28th between Real Madrid and Liverpool had been a “failure”. The game was delayed for 30 minutes as officers in riot gear prevented Liverpool supporters from entering the ground and tear-gassed the fans, including women and children. Initially, the French authorities had blamed Liverpool fans for the chaos.

Fact of the day: 761, the minimum number of tanks that Russia has lost since the start of its invasion of Ukraine. Read the full article.

Editor’s note
Readers of the weekend edition of Espresso can now enjoy a mini-crossword based on articles from The Economist. (Today’s edition includes the answers to last week’s puzzle.) We are also now publishing audio editions three times a day, to suit listeners in various time zones. Subscribers can either listen directly from the Espresso app, or add the audio edition to a preferred podcast app via economist.com/espresso. Comments and suggestions are always welcome at editor-espresso@economist.com.

A high plateau for inflation in America

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
There has been much talk of America nearing “peak inflation”. The hope was that price pressures, though still high, were about to start dissipating. But data for May, due to be published on Friday, will show that the peak looks more like a plateau—and an elevated one at that.

Economists forecast that consumer prices last month were 8.3% higher than a year earlier, roughly the same annual increase as in March and April. Some of the blame belongs to the continued rise in oil prices, clearly evident at the petrol pump. Worryingly, though, core inflation (which strips out food and energy) is also expected to have remained high. That reflects rising prices for services, which stem in part from higher wages in an ultra-tight labour market. Given this backdrop, the Federal Reserve will forge ahead with further hefty interest-rate increases. Consumers, companies and investors weary of high inflation will be stuck with it for a while.

A cautious reopening for Japanese tourism

PHOTO: AP
Japan closed its borders soon after the pandemic began in 2020. Even the Tokyo Olympics last year were held without foreign spectators. On Friday the country welcomes its first foreign tourists back. Yet the doors are only partially open.

Entry comes with strict conditions. Those on officially approved guided tours can enter the country; individual travellers remain barred. Eligibility is limited to visitors from 98 “low-risk” countries. Chaperones will watch over tourists throughout their visit, keeping records of their movements and ensuring they abide by pandemic precautions, including mask-wearing. Rule-breakers risk being sent home.

Japan will also cap overseas arrivals at 20,000 people per day. That is a far cry from the pre-pandemic crowds: in 2019 nearly 32m foreign tourists came to Japan, an average of more than 87,000 per day. But border controls remain popular among the Japanese. A full reopening is unlikely at least until after elections to Japan’s upper house in early July.


Missing in the Amazon

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The search continues for Dom Phillips, a British journalist, and Bruno Araújo Pereira, his Brazilian guide and an expert in indigenous affairs. The pair went missing in the Javari valley, an indigenous territory in the Brazilian Amazon, on Sunday. The region is known for “uncontacted” tribes who shun contact with the outside world. As in many parts of the Amazon, illegal loggers, miners and fishermen, as well as drug traffickers, have increased their activities in the valley in recent years. These incursions have sparked tensions with indigenous groups—and occasionally tipped into violence. Mr Pereira reportedly received death threats before his trip, though it is unclear from whom.

Brazil’s authorities have been slow to respond. President Jair Bolsonaro, who has long been disdainful of the media, dismissed the men’s reporting trip as an “adventure”. He drew criticism for not deploying the army quickly enough. The world was already watching the Amazon, as deforestation accelerated on Mr Bolsonaro’s watch. Now they have more reasons to worry.

A bumpy takeoff for the airline industry

PHOTO: REUTERS
The pandemic denied passengers both the joy and pain of travel, as borders were closed and airlines grounded their fleets. Now, as countries reopen, the urge among travellers to make up for lost time is causing misery in Europe and America. Passengers heading to airports on Friday are nervous after weeks of packed airports, and delayed or cancelled flights, which have left hordes of dissatisfied customers. Some have even been stranded abroad. But this is a sign that aviation is getting back to normal.

The number of seats on offer worldwide is close to pre-pandemic levels. But the pace of recovery caught the industry by surprise. Airports in particular are struggling to cope with a sharp increase in passengers and to replace workers laid off during the pandemic. Staff shortages caused by dismissals of ground and air crew during the pandemic have already caused some airlines to forgo adding even more capacity to meet the surging demand. Add the sky-high oil price, and a hot summer could be followed by a difficult winter.

BTS’s new album prepares for lift-off

PHOTO: AFLO
Nine years after releasing their first single BTS, a South Korean boy band, have become one of the world’s most successful groups. One of the few K-pop outfits to break America, BTS have racked up a string of number ones and a Grammy nomination. The group has political influence, too: the seven boys have visited the White House and spoken at the UN. In August their single “Dynamite”, which has 1.5bn views on YouTube, will travel to space courtesy of South Korea’s first lunar orbiter.

The release of BTS’s new album, “Proof”, on Friday, has attracted corresponding hype. Yet this three-disk release is a little different. It features greatest hits from throughout the band’s career, along with previously unheard demos and three new tracks. Cynics will draw comparisons to the interminable box sets put out by ageing rock stars keen on bolstering their pensions. But the world-beaters of BTS—none of whose members is yet 30—can safely ignore the naysayers.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: What was the first Broadway musical to be written by Lin-Manuel Miranda?
Thursday: Which actress won two Oscars in the 1970s for “Klute” and “Coming Home”?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Rahul Kumar, Robertsganj, India
North America: Todd Johnson, Ontario, Canada
Central and South America: Sylvia Freund, San Salvador, El Salvador
Europe: Brian O'Connor, Limerick, Ireland
Africa: Ewan Hickling, Pretoria, South Africa
Oceania: Graeme Maguire & Caroline Llewelyn, Como, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of coral reefs, Congo, LGFV and Samoa.

Know ye not that the end and object of conquest is to avoid doing the same thing as the conquered?

Alexander the Great
