The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 10, 2023

The death toll from the earthquakes in Turkey and Syria on Monday surpassed 20,000. Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, acknowledged that there were problems with his government’s response. Many Turks have complained that state rescue teams lacked expertise and appropriate equipment, and that they were slow to arrive, even though people remain trapped under rubble.

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, arrived in Brussels to address the European Parliament. During his speech he thanked European leaders for their support and reiterated Ukraine’s desire to join the bloc. On a surprise trip to London and Paris on Wednesday Mr Zelensky repeated his calls for the West to provide fighter jets to his country. Western allies have so far refused to send warplanes.

Nelson Peltz, an activist investor, said that his proxy fight with Disney had ended after Bob Igner, the company’s chief executive, unveiled a large restructuring programme that included 7,000 lay-offs. Mr Peltz had criticised Disney’s corporate governance before his firm, Trian, launched the proxy fight in January. He said that Disney now plans to do “everything” he had envisaged.

The State Department said that the Chinese balloon shot down over the Atlantic on Saturday was part of a sophisticated network of similar surveillance devices which China has operated over more than 40 countries across five continents. The department also said America was “confident” the balloon was made by a firm with direct links to China’s military.

Annual inflation in Germany fell in January, which may demand a revision of euro-zone inflation figures released last week. The publication of Germany’s data had been delayed due to technical issues. Germany’s harmonised index of consumer prices dropped from 9.6% in December to 9.2% last month; economists polled by Reuters had expected a rise to 10%.

Credit Suisse recorded its largest loss since the financial crisis in 2008 as it struggled to restore confidence after a series of social-media rumours questioning its liquidity and capital position emerged last year. The Swiss bank reported a loss of SFr1.4bn ($1.5bn) as both its investment banking and wealth management business suffered. That took its annual loss to SFr7.3bn.

Meta restored Donald Trump’s Facebook and Instagram accounts, which were suspended shortly after the Capitol insurrection on January 6th 2021. Earlier the social-media firm announced its decision to reinstate the former president’s accounts, concluding that his threat to public safety had “sufficiently receded”. Twitter restored Mr Trump’s account in November, but it has sat idle.

Fact of the day: 45,755, the number of people who came to Britain in small boats across the English Channel in 2022. Read the full story.

Turkey reckons with the aftermath of disaster

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Across the disaster zone hundreds of bodies are being pulled from the rubble every hour. Increasingly few are found alive. The death toll from the earthquakes that struck southern Turkey and northern Syria on February 6th has already exceeded 20,000 people, with more than 16,000 killed in Turkey alone. Rescue efforts are ongoing and aid is flooding in.

Even so, tens of thousands of people probably remain buried. At least 6,000 buildings in Turkey were destroyed; countless more are barely standing. Turkey’s shoddy building standards, often a product of corruption, have compounded the suffering. Even scores of new structures, supposedly quake-proof, have folded like houses of cards. Since a disaster in 1999 Turkey has collected an earthquake tax to fund disaster prevention and relief. Critics say the money was spent elsewhere. The priority now is surviving. Once the dust settles President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his government will have hard questions to answer.

Google’s AI chatbot woes

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Alphabet is learning how much damage a chatbot can do. On Wednesday Bard, an artificially intelligent program developed by Google’s parent company, failed to impress investors and presented a factual error in an advert. The blunder was compounded by comparisons with Microsoft, which on Tuesday showed off how its search engine, Bing, and browser, Edge, would be enhanced by AI. Microsoft is using models developed by OpenAI, the firm behind ChatGPT, an eerily perceptive chatbot.

Alphabet’s market value has since lost $170bn. The rout has less to do with Google’s gaffe than with the impression that Microsoft has stolen a march on its rival. (Google is yet to demonstrate how exactly Bard will integrate with search.) More competition and the use of expensive chatbots in search will mean lower profit margins, which will be especially painful for Google. Markets will watch closely to see how much users like the improved Bing, and how Google responds.


Lula goes to Washington

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the president of Brazil, will visit President Joe Biden in Washington on Friday. Lula’s objectives are to discuss the climate crisis and how to strengthen democracies, as well as Brazil’s role in the “new geopolitics”. To that end Lula is planning to make one international excursion a month, including to China after March.

Brazilian diplomacy typically favours neutrality; in the past, Lula has too. During his first two terms as president—from 2003 to 2010—he managed to maintain strong ties with America and China. The latter now buys around a fifth of Brazil’s exports.

In his inauguration speech on January 1st, Lula promised to again “have relations with everybody”. But Brazil, and the world, have changed since he was last in office. The relationship between America and China is more tense, and Lula’s reluctance to support Ukraine has caused friction with Western leaders. His noncommittal stance may not work as well this time.

Can China keep avoiding inflation?

PHOTO: AP
China has mostly dodged the inflation roiling the rest of the world. Its zero-covid regime restricted movement and took a heavy toll on Chinese morale. That suppressed consumer spending more effectively, ultimately, than it did infection. But now that China has abandoned lockdowns and quarantines, its consumers are shopping, dining and movie-going again. There is much talk of “revenge spending”. Will China also suffer from “revenge inflation”?

Figures released on Friday showed that inflation increased in January, but not by much. Consumer prices rose by 2.1% compared with a year earlier, up from 1.8% in December. Food prices should soften later in 2023 as China’s pork cycle turns. The ongoing property slump will keep rents subdued. And the economic slowdown elsewhere—partly engineered by central banks to stop inflation—could keep a lid on the price of commodities. The rest of the world fighting inflation so earnestly means that China might not have to.

An extraordinary exhibition of Vermeer’s paintings

PHOTO: COURTESY OF RIJKSMUSEUM
The “Vermeer” exhibition that opens in Amsterdam on Friday is an extravaganza. The Rijksmuseum is showing 28 paintings by Johannes Vermeer, the most ever assembled in one place. They represent around three-quarters of his surviving works. (One was stolen in Boston in 1990 and hasn’t been seen since.) The pieces have been gathered from seven countries, despite the typical reluctance of institutions to loan out such paintings.

The Rijksmuseum has sold more advanced tickets for “Vermeer” than for any previous show. It is easy to see why. The exhibition traces the development of the artist’s technique, the leap he made to depict interiors, and the way he honed his mastery of perspective, colour and (above all) light. Vermeer died penniless in 1675, aged just 43, but today he is an artistic deity. For fans of “The Milkmaid” and “Girl with a Pearl Earring”, this show is a once-in-a-lifetime thrill.

Daily Quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Please note, the way we choose winners has changed. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: What is Robert Watson-Watt generally credited with inventing in 1935?

Thursday: Which 1953 film musical, starring Ethel Merman, features the song “The Hostess with the Mostess”?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Mark Pollard, Asti, Italy
Yuki Arima, Tokyo, Japan
Jack Conn, Minneapolis, United States

They all gave the correct answers of decarbonise, demand, brain and El Niño. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

To live means to finesse the processes to which one is subjugated.

Bertolt Brecht
