The world in brief
June 15, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

America’s Federal Reserve left its benchmark interest rate unchanged for the first time in more than a year, voting to keep the existing target range of between 5% and 5.25%. Still, the Fed signalled it may raise rates again as soon as next month. While headline inflation, reported on Tuesday, is down, it remains uncomfortably high; the rate of core inflation (excluding volatile food and energy prices) is higher still.

America’s Secretary of State, Antony Blinken, will visit China this weekend, the State Department confirmed. Earlier Mr Blinken spoke to China’s foreign minister, Qin Gang, who urged America to “stop interfering” in his country’s affairs. Mr Blinken’s planned visit to China in February was postponed after a suspected Chinese spy balloon was shot down over American territory.

European lawmakers voted to approve the AI Act, in a step towards passing one of the world’s first major laws on the technology. The legislation would ban high-risk systems such as predictive policing and introduce guardrails on generative artificial-intelligence. EU-member states, the parliament and the commission will now negotiate a final position by the end of the year.

The European Commission hit Google with fresh charges over alleged anti-competitive practices in the advertising-technology sector, saying it may need to sell part of its online advertising business. Such a move would be the first time the commission has ordered a tech giant’s divestiture. Google disputed the allegations.

Nigeria’s central bank floated the country’s currency, the naira, allowing it to devalue as much as 36%, down to a record low of 750 to the dollar. Previously, multiple exchange rates have led to numerous shortages of foreign currencies, notably the dollar. The move came days after Nigeria’s president, Bola Tinubu, suspended the central-bank governor, under whom the currency situation had deteriorated.

Turkey slammed the door to NATO on Sweden. The Scandinavian country hopes to join the West’s military alliance at a summit next month. But Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, said his country would not back the bid unless Sweden reined in demonstrations against his government. Finland, which also started its accession process after Russia invaded Ukraine, joined NATO in April.

A migrant boat sank off the southern coast of Greece, killing at least 78 people in the deadliest shipwreck of its kind so far this year. Rescuers saved more than 100 people from the water, though their efforts were hampered by strong winds. The boat was bound for Italy, and is thought to have set off from eastern Libya.

Figure of the day: 124, the number of nations and territories with fertility rates below 2.1 (known as the replacement rate) in 2021, according to the UN—up from 98 in 2010. Read the full story.


PHOTO: ALAMY
A tetchy NATO gathering
Thursday’s meeting of NATO’s defence ministers in Brussels will be an anxious affair. Ukraine’s counter-offensive is making slow progress; Russia boasts of destroying Western equipment; and Belarus says it has taken delivery of Russian tactical nuclear weapons (Western officials deny this). What is more, Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, said on Wednesday that he would probably not approve Sweden’s bid to join NATO at the alliance’s summit in Lithuania next month.

In Brussels the allies will debate how to make good on their pledge to support Ukraine “for as long as it takes”. The hardest discussion concerns whether to offer NATO membership to the embattled country. America and Germany are reluctant to do so, worried they might be drawn directly into war with Russia. Instead, promises of multi-annual weapons support seem likely. But these pledges will be issued by groups of allies rather than NATO as a whole. And they may fall short of the binding commitment that Ukraine craves.


PHOTO: DPA
The ECB gears up for a summer slowdown
Inflation in the euro zone remains stubbornly high, while wages are likely to rise further. That poses a challenge for policymakers at the European Central Bank as they meet on Thursday to decide by how much to raise interest rates. Markets expect a rise of a quarter of a percentage point. They then anticipate another such increase in July, before a pause in hikes.

Will that be enough? True, headline inflation year-on-year fell from 7% in April to 6.1% in May. It will probably fall further as energy prices drop and food prices stabilise. But less-volatile “core” inflation, which strips out energy and food prices, may remain around its current level of 5.3% as wages grow. In May Indeed, a hiring website, observed a 4.7% annual increase in wages. The summer break is near, but the ECB still has work to do.



PHOTO: AP
California’s budget woes
California is used to whiplash. In the Golden State, drought fast becomes deluge. But this year it is facing a fiscal jolt, too, as last year’s $97bn budget surplus has turned into a $32bn deficit. State lawmakers must pass a budget by Thursday that plugs the gap.

Why have the state’s fortunes flipped so fast? California’s budget swelled from $215bn in 2019 to $308bn in 2022, thanks to federal pandemic-relief funds, which must be fully allocated by the end of 2024. The state’s tax structure also plays a role. More than half of California’s revenue comes from a progressive personal-income tax, including levies on capital gains, which have fallen as the stockmarket has faltered.

As lawmakers haggle over spending, the biggest question is what will happen to flailing public-transport agencies. The Bay Area’s subway system, BART, is hurtling towards the fiscal buffers because of low passenger numbers. Unless lawmakers’ plans are derailed, a bailout seems likely.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Boris Johnson faces the music
On Thursday Boris Johnson, Britain’s former prime minister, will receive the judgment of his peers. MPs on the Privileges Committee of the House of Commons, a cross-party group that polices conduct, will issue a report on whether Mr Johnson lied about Partygate, a scandal over boozy gatherings held in Downing Street during covid-19 lockdowns. It is widely expected to find that he misled MPs when he told Parliament that the gatherings were within the rules.

Those parties contributed to Mr Johnson’s exit from office in 2022. He was likely to face the additional punishment of being suspended from Parliament, which in turn could have triggered a petition in his constituency that would force a by-election. Instead, last week he resigned his seat. Mr Johnson described the report as “nonsense” and denounced the committee as a “kangaroo court”. Those comments reflect not only his anger at the committee, but also his desire to stir up trouble for Rishi Sunak, the current prime minister.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Kim Yo Jong, North Korea’s dictator in waiting?
Communist bigwigs have a grand tradition of withering put-downs. Few modern practitioners are as skilled at it as Kim Yo Jong. As the head of North Korea’s propaganda apparatus, her vituperous jibes have upbraided world leaders in offensive ways (for example, describing South Korea’s ruling administration as “puppet conservative gangsters”). Such theatre would be little more than geopolitical light relief were North Korea not armed with nukes, and were Ms Kim not the sister of the man with his finger on the button, Kim Jong Un.

A new book, “The Sister”, by Lee Sung-Yoon, gathers together what little is known about Ms Kim and argues that she is next in line for North Korea’s throne. But predictions are just a parlour game for North Korea watchers. The book’s real strength is in recounting the Kim family’s history of using its weapons programmes to extract concessions in negotiations. If talks ever restart, the West would do well to have studied their playbook.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which breed, known best for its distinctive stance, is known as a “bird dog” in the southern US?

Wednesday: Which body held its first sessions at the Royal Exchange in New York city in 1790?

You campaign in poetry. You govern in prose.

Mario Cuomo
