The world in brief
June 2, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Chuck Schumer, the Democratic majority leader in the Senate, said America’s upper chamber would stay in session until it passed a bill to suspend the country’s debt ceiling. That would allow America to resume borrowing money and avoid a sovereign default. On Wednesday the House of Representatives approved the deal by a margin of 314 to 117. The Treasury has projected that it may run out of cash by June 5th.

Inflation in the euro zone fell to an annualised rate of 6.1% in May, down from 7% a month earlier. But core inflation, which strips out volatile costs of products including food and fuel, dropped less dramatically to 5.3%, a decrease of just 0.3%. The European Central Bank meets in two weeks and will likely raise interest rates again.

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said his country is “ready to join NATO” at the second meeting of the European Political Community, a gathering of the continent’s leaders, in Moldova. Mr Zelensky also supported his host’s aspirations to join the EU. Earlier, at a meeting of NATO ministers, Jens Stoltenberg, the alliance’s secretary general, said Russia could not veto Ukrainian membership.

A court in Senegal found Ousmane Sonko, an opposition leader, guilty of “corrupting youth”, while acquitting him of charges of rape and of issuing death threats. He faces two years in jail. The trial has sparked violent protests in one of Africa’s more stable democracies. Mr Sonko says the accusations are designed to disqualify him from running in the country’s 2024 presidential elections.

South Africa’s foreign minister, Naledi Pandor, deflected questions about whether Vladimir Putin would be arrested if he attended a BRICS summit there in August; the Russian president is wanted for war crimes by the International Criminal Court. Ms Pandor suggested that South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, will indicate a “final position”. Her comments came as foreign ministers of BRICS countries met ahead of the summit.

An Australian civil court ruled that the country’s most highly-decorated living war hero, Ben Roberts-Smith, committed war crimes when he was serving in its special forces in Afghanistan. Mr Roberts-Smith sued three Australian newspapers for defamation over allegations that he murdered several unarmed civilians. A judge found that four of the six murder allegations were “substantially true”. Mr Roberts-Smith does not face criminal charges.

Nintendo, a Japanese video-gaming giant, said it would no longer sell its products online in Russia, blaming the “economic outlook”. Russian customers will not be able to buy new releases, but can download previously owned items. The makers of Super Mario ceased shipping physical goods to Russia following the invasion of Ukraine. Sony, a rival firm, suspended all operations in March 2022.

Figure of the day: $1.3trn, the reduction in spending over the next decade attributable to the deal to raise the American government’s debt limit. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America continues its long jobs boom
In relative terms America’s labour market may be cooling a little. But in absolute terms it remains remarkably hot. Data due out on Friday is forecast to show that the economy added about 180,000 jobs in May. That is a mild decline from the 250,000 created in April, but it would mark the 29th straight monthly expansion. America’s unemployment rate may have ticked up to 3.5% in May, just above a five-decade record low.

The strength of the labour market is testament to the economy’s resilience in the face of the Federal Reserve’s aggressive interest-rate increases. The worry for the central bank is whether the robust hiring will feed into big salary increases, thereby undermining its efforts to rein in inflation. There is not much evidence of that yet, with wage growth easing slightly since mid-2022. Still, the longer that America’s job market remains ultra-hot, the bigger the risk of it spilling over into broader price pressures.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Alphabet’s AGM
Google’s parent company, Alphabet, holds its annual general meeting on Friday. Shareholders have lodged 13 proxy motions. They include a request for more information about how the firm’s algorithms work, and a plan to change shareholders’ voting rights. Currently Larry Page and Sergey Brin, the company’s co-founders, hold 12% of the firm’s stock but control 51% of shareholder votes. The proposal seeks a one-vote-per-share model.

Yet activist investors should not expect change. In the past two years Alphabet has rejected every proxy motion. Instead, the firm’s management will highlight its progress in artificial intelligence. The company had been seen as lagging behind its rival Microsoft, which added AI features to its Bing search engine this February. But on May 10th Alphabet announced some 15 new AI products and features, including software to brush up users’ prose and to make music from text. Investors seemed happy. Whether the company can turn the features into profits remains to be seen.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Cruising for a bruising in the South China Sea
On Friday a yacht called the Dolphin is expected to set sail from the western Philippines on a maiden cruise to the nearby Spratly Islands. Aboard will be 20 tourists of various nationalities. The cruise promises a week of good fishing and diving in the South China Sea—and, perhaps, the frisson of an encounter with armed and hostile Chinese mariners. That is because the Dolphin is bound for waters disputed by China and the Philippines. Their grey-zone tussle has the potential to drag America, which is committed to defend the Philippines, into war with China.

The state-sanctioned cruise is intended to assert the legal right of the Philippines to exploit the disputed area for economic purposes. China asserts its claims in more muscular fashion: its coastguard or maritime militia craft scare off intruders by employing violent tactics, such as ramming boats or dousing their crews with hoses. The Dolphin will probably go unmolested. But a Philippine Coast Guard vessel will escort the yacht, just in case.


PHOTO: AP
Nepal’s prime minister visits India
On Friday Pushpa Kamal Dahal, Nepal’s prime minister, continues a four-day visit to India, his first trip abroad since he took office last year. Earlier in the trip he met his Indian counterpart, Narendra Modi. The pair signed agreements on infrastructure investment and trade. They also promised to settle a border dispute through bilateral dialogue.

Closer economic ties are good for both countries. Nepal wants India to invest in hydroelectric projects and to lower customs duties to reduce its trade deficit. India is keen to blunt China’s influence in the region. Over the years the two giants have wooed Nepal: India is the country’s biggest trading partner, but China pumps in money to help build roads, dams and railways. America plays an important role, too. Last year Nepal’s parliament approved a $500m American aid package, angering China. When it comes to geopolitics, Nepal faces a task of Himalayan proportions to keep everybody happy.


PHOTO: ESTATE OF PABLO PICASSO / ARTIST
A Picasso show, by his detractors
About 50 exhibitions this year mark the 50th anniversary of Pablo Picasso’s death. But perhaps only one is curated by someone who hates him. “I really, really want to stick one up him,” Hannah Gadsby recently declared. The Australian comedian, who skewered Picasso’s misogyny in “Nanette”, a stand-up special in 2018, has co-curated “It’s Pablo-matic: Picasso According to Hannah Gadsby”, an exhibition that opens on Friday at the Brooklyn Museum in New York.

It was arguably risky to hand the reins to an artist who has dismissed Picasso’s innovation of cubism as “a kaleidoscope filter on [his] cock.” Yet the show’s other curators insist that the exhibition is really about posing questions that challenge assumptions about Picasso’s art and legacy. As Catherine Morris, a senior curator for the museum’s feminist-art collection, explains: “If we wanted to cancel Picasso, we wouldn’t be giving him so much space.”


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which 1980s TV show starred George Peppard and Mr T?

Thursday: Which city in Connacht, in the west of Ireland, is noted for its arts festival and folk music?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Ron George, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
Antony Devasia, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India
Guillermo Garrido, Orlando, Florida, America

They all gave the correct answers of Indiana Jones, Invest, Novel and Senate. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

I am only fond of what comes from the heart.

Martha Washington
