The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (07:41 GMT+1 London)

President Joe Biden issued a plaintive demand for stricter gun laws with a prime-time speech on Thursday evening. He pleaded mainly on behalf of incremental legislation that is already pending. If lawmakers cannot ban assault rifles, he argued, they ought to require that buyers be 21 years old. Altogether three mass shootings in 18 days—in Buffalo, New York; in Uvalde, Texas; and in Tulsa, Oklahoma—have left 35 people dead. (On Thursday itself there were at least two further mass shootings, in Iowa and in Wisconsin.) A bipartisan group of senators is trying to strike a deal, though opposition from Republicans seems certain to stymie substantial reform.

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said Russian forces have seized a fifth of his country, as the war passed the 100-day milestone. He told Luxembourg’s parliament that the frontlines are now more than 1,000km long. Later, in his nightly address, he said that while the situation in the Donbas region, the focus of Russia’s attacks in recent weeks, has not changed much, Ukrainian forces have had “some success” in the besieged city of Severodonetsk.

America imposed fresh sanctions on Russian elites and other entities. Several aircraft factories, shipbuilding firms and research institutes were added to a trade blacklist. America also identified several yachts in which Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, “has an interest”. Separately, the European Union dropped Patriarch Kirill, the head of the Russian Orthodox Church, from its forthcoming sanctions package, amid opposition from Hungary.

Mr Biden will soon visit Saudi Arabia, several news outlets reported, three years after he vowed to isolate the kingdom over the murder of Jamal Khashoggi. The rapprochement comes amid Mr Biden’s campaign to boost oil output and reduce prices. On Thursday the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies, which include Russia, agreed to raise production by almost 650,000 barrels per day in July, and by a similar amount in August.

The government of Yemen and the country’s Houthi rebels agreed to extend their ceasefire by two months, the UN announced. Mr Biden praised the “courageous leadership” of Saudi Arabia in implementing the UN-brokered deal, which was first agreed in April and was set to expire on Thursday. Mr Biden also said that Egypt, Oman and Jordan had played key roles in facilitating the truce.

Anthony Albanese, Australia’s new prime minister, proposed raising the minimum wage to help families deal with surging inflation. Mr Albanese has asked an independent wage-setting body to increase the rate from its current A$20 ($15) per hour. He did not reveal how much of a bump he requested, but he promised a 5.1% increase during his election campaign.

“Turkey” is no more at the United Nations, which henceforth recognises it as Türkiye. The country formerly known as Turkey would prefer not to be associated with poultry, nor with duds nor “silly” people, according to a state broadcaster. By de-Anglicising the name, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan deepens his stamp upon the republic in time for its 100th anniversary next year.

Fact of the Day: 12, the number of recessions America has suffered since 1945. Read the full article.

Could Uvalde be different?

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Perversely, mass shootings aid America’s gun-control movement. Suicide, domestic and gang shootings claim many more lives. Yet large-scale killings, which account for a relatively small fraction of firearm deaths, make headlines, inspire outrage and spur activism.

Thus the window after a massacre is the time for campaigners to make their case. Joe Biden said his piece on Thursday night. On Friday Americans will mark National Gun Violence Awareness Day. Will the tragedy in Uvalde, Texas—along with the shooting in Tulsa, Oklahoma on Wednesday, which left four dead—galvanise action in Congress? A bipartisan group of senators is trying to negotiate a deal to overcome the filibuster. Among the proposals are incentives for states to enact “red-flag” laws, which let authorities confiscate guns from people who have behaved threateningly. Also under discussion are stronger background checks for buyers and requirements for safe storage. Gun-loving Republicans want to fund mental-health treatment and school safety instead. That is avoiding the most obvious solution.


America’s jobs market comes off the boil

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Companies normally want to see a strong labour market as evidence of a robust economy. But when America releases its monthly payroll data on Friday, many hope to see weakness. Analysts reckon that about 325,000 jobs were created in May, down from 430,000 in April. If so, it would be a sign that America’s ultra-tight labour market may be cooling, a necessary development if inflation is to decelerate.

There are nearly two jobs available for every unemployed person in America, a record high. From trucking companies to restaurants, managers complain that it is hard to find workers, even after offering hefty wages. Workers themselves are unhappy because their inflation-adjusted earnings have fallen. Some analysts had thought the labour market would heal as the pandemic receded and more people returned to work. Now, though, it looks like only an economic slowdown will do the trick. The question is how steep it will be.

Financing the WHO

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The World Health Organisation has long had its financial hands tied. Until recently the WHO was free to spend just 22% of its two-yearly budget, which most recently stood at $5.84bn. Everything else was earmarked for specific projects, such as fighting malaria or anti-tobacco initiatives. That meant that when an epidemic, like Ebola, or a pandemic, such as covid-19, emerged, the organisation had to go begging for money. It also hindered the WHO from prioritising long-term outbreak preparations over popular short-term projects.

That may all now change. In late May the World Health Assembly, which oversees the WHO, decided to fundamentally change its funding model. By 2030-31 the WHO will be free to spend half of its budget the way it sees fit. The change is a vote of confidence for the WHO’s director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who recently won a second five-year term. It is perhaps also a tacit admission that the agency was not well prepared for a pandemic.

Facebook’s podcast pivot

PHOTO: ALAMY
On Friday Meta, the parent company of Facebook, will begin shutting down its home-grown podcast platform. Facebook launched its audio hub in April 2021, just as podcasts were surging in popularity (and valuations) amid the pandemic. In 2020 Amazon, Spotify and SiriusXM spent hundreds of millions of dollars on popular shows and networks. In early 2021 Clubhouse, a buzzy startup which hosts live audio conversations, reached a $4bn valuation.

But despite its massive user base Meta failed to become an audio giant. Today it is shifting its focus, investing in short video to compete with TikTok, which is growing furiously while Facebook’s user base stagnates. Meta is grappling with other changes too. Sheryl Sandberg, the longtime chief operating officer, will leave the firm in the autumn. Her departure may foreshadow an even greater investment in the immersive experiences promised by the metaverse, as the newish name of Facebook’s parent company suggests.

Chronicling the life of Siegfried Sassoon

PHOTO: LAURENCE CENDROWICZ/VERTIGO RELE
During the early years of the first world war Siegfried Sassoon was an enthusiastic, patriotic fighter. But the British poet quickly developed a deep cynicism about conflict. Within two years of his terrible ordeal in the trenches on the Western front, he would write:

For death has made me wise and bitter and strong;

And I am rich in all that I have lost.

“Benediction”, a new biographical film about Sassoon, arrives in American cinemas on Friday. (It was released in Britain on May 20th.) The film follows the writer as he is sent to a military psychiatric facility for criticising the war, chronicling Sassoon’s friendship with Wilfred Owen, another famous poet, his relationships with men and his later marriage to Hester Gatty. Sassoon died in 1967 but his writing retains its haunting power. His reflections on the pointlessness and suffering of war seem particularly prescient today.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which singer, with hits such as “Mambo Italiano” and “This Ole House”, starred opposite Bing Crosby in the film “White Christmas”?

Thursday: Which fashionable French ski resort, close to the Italian border, was the childhood home of triple Olympic champion Jean-Claude Killy?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Rajesh Raman, Singapore

North America: Jaime Jean, Mexico City, Mexico

Central and South America: Ismael Romero, San Salvador, El Salvador

Europe: Tim G.A. Vink, The Hague, Netherlands

Africa: Caroline Grzeschke, Cape Town, South Africa

Oceania: Olivia Jeavons, Sydney, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Ramsbottom, Rishi, BASF and Mayor.

You must learn to protect yourself with the pen, and not the gun.

Josephine Baker
