The world in brief
August 28, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Russian officials said that genetic tests confirmed that Yevgeny Prigozhin, head of the Wagner mercenary group, had died in a private-jet crash on August 23rd. The remains of all ten people on board were identified and matched the names originally published, they reported. Mr Prigozhin led a brief mutiny in the summer, and many Western observers believe the Kremlin orchestrated the crash—something it denies.

India’s government set a minimum price for exports of basmati rice, the latest in a series of restrictions that have roiled the global rice market. India, whose annual exports amount to about 40% of the world’s total, banned shipments of its non-basmati white rice, its largest category, in July, because of worries that uneven monsoon rains could reduce yields. Prices rocketed in response.

Evergrande, a heavily indebted Chinese property developer, reported a loss of 33bn yuan ($4.5bn) in the first six months of 2023—roughly half as much as in the same period last year. Earlier in August Evergrande filed for bankruptcy protection in New York to shield it from American creditors. The firm, which defaulted in 2021, has been badly hit by the crisis in China’s property sector.

Japanese authorities said that tests had found no evidence of radioactivity in the seawater around the Fukushima nuclear-power plant. On Thursday Japan began releasing wastewater from the plant, which in 2011 was hit by a tsunami that triggered a nuclear meltdown. The decision sparked a row with China, which accused Japan of treating the ocean like a “sewer” and banned seafood imports from the country.

Three American marines were killed when a helicopter crashed during military exercises off northern Australia. Another 20 were injured, five seriously. The incident occurred during training involving troops from Australia, America, East Timor, Indonesia and the Philippines. On July 29th four Australian soldiers died in another helicopter crash during joint exercises with America.

Profits at China’s industrial firms fell for a seventh consecutive month, decreasing by 6.7% year on year in July. Industrial output was affected by heavy rains in many parts of the country. Companies were also squeezed by weak demand amid slowing economic growth. The figures cover firms with annual revenues of at least 20m yuan ($2.8m).

Donald Trump’s election campaign has raised $7.1m since Thursday night, when he was arrested in Georgia, charged with plotting to overturn the result of the 2020 presidential election. The surge—on Friday his campaign raised $4m—is due to the sale of merchandise featuring his mugshot. Mr Trump’s pout has been pasted on actual mugs, and T-shirts, captioned “NEVER SURRENDER!”

Figure of the day: 35-40%, the proportion of Ukrainian drones that make it past Russian defences to the general vicinity of their target. Read the full story.


An unhappy anniversary for Chinese property
When China’s “three red lines” policy was implemented on September 1st 2020, few foresaw how badly it would damage the property sector. The rules meant that developers’ liabilities could not exceed 70% of their assets; their net debts could not be greater than their equity; and their cash could not be less than their short-term borrowing. The aim was to deflate a dangerous bubble that had been inflating for years.

The policy, which turns three this week, continues to cause chaos. Worries that house prices would no longer rise meant that many Chinese people chose not to buy homes. This July sales of commercial flats fell by 43% compared with the month before, and more large cities witnessed home prices fall in July than saw them rise. Scores of developers have defaulted: Country Garden, one of China’s largest, is currently looking shaky. Should it default on payments due to investors in early September, the crisis will get much worse.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Chaos at LA’s City Hall
Yet another Los Angeles politician has an appointment in court. On Monday Curren Price, a city councilman, will be arraigned on charges of embezzlement, perjury and conflict of interest. He is accused of voting on projects in which he had a financial stake and of collecting medical benefits for a woman who was not yet his wife. Mr Price is the fourth member of the city council to face criminal charges in as many years.

The upheaval comes at a time when the City of Angels needs politicians focused on its problems, rather than on their own pockets. America’s second-biggest city is reckoning with strikes by Hollywood’s writers and actors, increasing homelessness and a shrinking population. Recent projections suggest that LA County could lose 1.7m people, or nearly 18% of its 2020 population, by 2060. LA needs to find ways to convince people to stay. Cleaning up City Hall would be a good start.


Debating academic freedom in India
The monsoon term kicks off on Monday at Ashoka University, one of India’s top liberal-arts colleges, amid a row over academic freedom. Trouble began in late July, after a junior economics professor circulated a draft paper presenting evidence that the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party had manipulated the outcome of the general election in 2019. Social-media attacks from BJP supporters followed. Ashoka’s governing body hastened to point out that the paper did not reflect its views and had not been peer-reviewed.

Its author resigned; another professor quit in solidarity. Staff in the economics department and elsewhere told the university that it must re-hire their colleague and stop interfering in academics’ research, or face a mass walkout when term began. Academics from across India rallied to the cause. Many considered the governing body’s response—it claimed that researchers could work unencumbered and that it had tried to stop the author’s resignation—insufficient. As students return, the shadow of political interference looms over Ashoka.


PHOTO: AFP
Americans are missing too much school
As American children start a new school year, some classrooms may be emptier than usual. In the 2021-22 academic year 28% of pupils missed at least three and a half weeks of school, according to a study by Stanford University. “Chronic absenteeism”—when an enrolled pupil misses 10% of the year—almost doubled between 2018-19 and 2021-22.

Many students appear to be opting out entirely. Public-school enrolment fell between autumn 2019 and autumn 2021 by 2.5% (about 1.2m pupils); homeschooling, meanwhile, rose by 30%. It seems some pupils, or parents, no longer think in-person teaching is worthwhile, having tried the alternative during the pandemic.

But attending school is important: children who skip class are more likely to underperform. Educators are therefore trying to coax them back. Chicago Collegiate, a school in the city, is offering pupils rewards and holding pizza parties. Some teachers have resorted to visiting pupils’ homes to urge them to come to school. Mass education needs mass.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A new rivalry lights up tennis
For nearly two decades, tennis fans feasted on the rivalry of the sport’s Big Three. Matches between Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic—players from Switzerland, Spain and Serbia, respectively, who have won 65 major tournaments between them—were always worth watching. But after Mr Federer retired in 2022, and with Mr Nadal struggling with injuries, many feared they would be starved of such duels. They need not have worried.

Enter Carlos Alcaraz, a 20-year-old Spanish prodigy. Last month, in the final at Wimbledon, Mr Alcaraz beat Mr Djokovic in a five-hour epic. Mr Djokovic got some measure of revenge last week, defeating the Spaniard at the Cincinnati Open, in the longest final in the tournament’s history. At the US Open, which starts on Monday, the pair are the favourites to meet in the final. There may be 126 other players in the draw, but all eyes will be on Mr Alcaraz and Mr Djokovic.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: What is the name of the Royal Air Force's aerobatic display team?

Love does not dominate, it cultivates. And that is more.

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
