The world in brief
 May 5, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, gave a speech at the International Criminal Court in The Hague during an unannounced visit to the Netherlands. Mr Zelensky accused Russia of committing more than 6,000 war crimes in April alone. In March the ICC issued an arrest warrant for Russia’s president on war crimes charges. Meanwhile, Russia accused America of planning a drone attack on the Kremlin and said that Ukraine had acted on American orders. Both governments have denied these claims. The allegations came after Russia launched strikes on Ukrainian cities.

The European Central Bank raised interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point, bringing them to 3.25%. Although the bank’s seventh rate increase since mid-2022 was smaller than previous ones, Christine Lagarde, the ECB’s president, said it would not be the last such hike this year. On Wednesday the Federal Reserve also raised its benchmark interest rate to a 16-year high of 5-5.25%.

Four members of the Proud Boys, an American far-right group, were convicted of seditious conspiracy for their role in the Capitol riot on January 6th 2021. A jury in Washington said that the men, including the group’s former leader, Enrique Tarrio, had planned the riot to keep Donald Trump in power. It is the last of three sedition cases against key figures involved in the riot.

President Joe Biden said that the conflict in Sudan “must end” and announced new American sanctions against individuals involved in the war. Heavy fighting continued in Khartoum, Sudan’s capital, on Thursday. Martin Griffiths, a UN aid official, told the BBC that the country’s rival military leaders did not have the “will” to end the conflict.

PacWest, an American bank, is in talks with investors and several potential partners to discuss options which may include a sale or the raising of fresh capital. The bank’s share price fell by 52% on Wednesday. The decision comes days after First Republic was shut down by American regulators and taken over by JPMorgan Chase.

Johnson & Johnson’s consumer-health spin-off, Kenvue, saw its share price pop by a fifth in its opening day on the New York Stock Exchange. The maker of Tylenol raised $3.8bn at a valuation of $41bn, the largest flotation since Rivian, an electric-truck manufacturer, listed in 2021. J&J owns more than 90% of Kenvue, though it plans to reduce its stake in future.

A jury in Manhattan found that Ed Sheeran did not unlawfully copy Marvin Gaye’s 1973 chart-topper, “Let’s Get It On”, in his own 2014 hit, “Thinking Out Loud”. Mr Sheeran took the witness stand to strum his song’s chord progression and sing the opening lyrics. The heirs of Gaye’s songwriter sued Mr Sheeran in 2017, seeking a share of the profits of “Thinking Out Loud”.

Fact of the day: 53%, the proportion of Americans that say that social media is mostly or fully responsible for increasing teenagers’ depression, according to a recent survey. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
DeSantis pushes Florida to the right
On Friday Florida’s legislative session concludes after 60 days of controversial lawmaking. Plotting his run for the presidency next year Ron DeSantis, Florida’s Republican governor, has pushed right-wing policies designed to boost his popularity with primary voters. These include a ban on abortions six weeks after pregnancy and permission for the “permitless carry” of handguns. Republican majorities in both chambers of Florida’s legislature waved his agenda through.

After Mr DeSantis’s re-election last November Republican donors began to see him as the most viable presidential alternative to Donald Trump. But many now wonder if his stance on abortion and guns, as well as some of his “anti-woke” agenda and his ongoing row with Disney, is wrong-headed. Mr Trump has lately surged in popularity as Mr DeSantis has dropped off: some 53% of Republican voters now say they would prefer to see Mr Trump win their party’s nomination next year, compared with 31% for his Floridian rival, according to a poll by The Economist and YouGov.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Cambodia hosts the SEA Games
Just 11 countries will take part in the South-East Asian Games that begin in Cambodia on Friday. But with 581 medals at stake—nearly twice the number available at the most recent Olympics—the games can claim in one sense to be the world’s biggest sporting event. Athletes will run and swim but will also engage in more offbeat competitions, like obstacle racing and jet-skiing.

Obscure sports are an SEA Games tradition, explained largely by the hosts’ hunger for gongs. The easiest way to boost medal counts is to hold events in which there is little competition. Hence the addition of ouk chaktrang, a Cambodian version of chess, and kun bokator, a local martial art, to this year’s line-up. The tactic usually works. When the Philippines hosted the games in 2019, it was overall champion with 387 medals—thanks in part to the inclusion of baseball and other Filipino pastimes. Vietnam, which hosted the following games in 2022, dropped those events. The Philippines’ medal count fell to just 226.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Adidas tries to lure back its Chinese customers
Can a foreign brand be seen as patriotic in China? Adidas, a German sportswear retailer, hopes so. Along with many other Western firms the company lost market share in China in recent years after it stopped buying cotton from the far north-west region of Xinjiang, where, America says, forced labour has been used to grow it. Chinese state media responded by encouraging consumers to boycott foreign retailers and to patronise local ones, such as Li-Ning.

To win back customers Adidas has come up with a new line of sportswear designed for the local market. According to the Financial Times the brand is selling jackets emblazoned with the word “China”, written in Chinese characters. That is just part of a broader plan for growth. Investors will get a sense of how things are going on Friday, when Adidas reports its earnings for the first quarter.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
A conservative gabfest in Hungary
Tucker Carlson may be persona non grata at Fox News, but the sacked television anchor is welcome at the Conservative Political Action Conference in Budapest. A bizarre video shown on Thursday, the first day of the two-day conference, had Mr Carlson promising to attend in person “if I ever get fired”. Yet despite losing his job last month, he did not show up.

For decades CPAC has been a gathering of the American right. Last year it held its first event in Hungary, where illiberal, anti-immigrant, anti-gay policies have made the country’s prime minister, Viktor Orban, a nationalist-populist hero at home and beyond.

Opening the conference Mr Orban called for Donald Trump to return to America’s presidency and echoed Vladimir Putin in denouncing “colour revolutions”. Mr Orban called CPAC an incubator for the “future” of conservative politics. But the speakers’ list for Friday has a lot of “formers” on it. It includes Janez Jansa, a former prime minister of Slovenia, and Steve Bannon, Mr Trump’s ex-strategist. Less action, more reaction.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Lagerfeld at the Met
“Fashion does not belong in a museum”, Karl Lagerfeld once griped. But the German designer would probably not have minded being the subject of a retrospective at New York’s Metropolitan Museum.

“Karl Lagerfeld: A Line of Beauty”, which opens on Friday, showcases around 150 pieces from a long, storied career. Lagerfeld began as a teenage apprentice in Paris in the 1950s, before climbing the ranks of fashion houses Chloé and Fendi. In 1983 he was appointed creative director of Chanel—a job he held until his death in 2019 at the age of 85.

The Met exhibition weaves through a dizzying array of styles, with some outfits inspired by the fussiness of Rococo and others by angular modernism. Less space is given to the controversies in which Lagerfeld sometimes trafficked. He said he was “fed up” with the feminist #MeToo movement, and claimed that “no one wants to see curvy women”. His creative brilliance may be timeless; his views less so.


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Bernt Arne Ødegaard, Fitjar, Norway
Beatriz Gonzalez Frias, York, Britain
Graham Voss, Victoria, Canada

They all gave the correct answers of Supreme Court, shadow, mafia and tariff. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which hip-hop group was founded by Chuck D and Flavor Flav in 1985?

Thursday: M3gan and Chucky, the subjects of horror movies, are what kind of creature?

The tyrant dies and his rule is over; the martyr dies and his rule begins.

Soren Kierkegaard
