The world in brief
August 16, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Russia’s central bank raised interest rates by 3.5 percentage points, to 12%, after the rouble collapsed. On Monday the currency slipped past the value of 100 to the American dollar. Western sanctions, a cap on the price of Russian oil and a surge in imports have sent the rouble plunging. The bank said the decision was made to stabilise prices.

Russia launched air attacks on Lviv and Volyn, in western Ukraine—regions that typically experience fewer attacks than the east and south of the country, which are on the war’s frontlines. Ukraine’s air defence forces said they destroyed 16 of at least 28 Russian missiles. Three people were killed in Volyn, according to officials.

Britain revealed that, in February, it had arrested five people suspected of spying for Russia’s security services. The BBC earlier identified three of the accused as Bulgarian nationals. It reported that they were arrested under the Official Secrets Act and charged with the lesser crime of possessing false identity documents. None of the five has yet been charged with espionage; the three Bulgarians remain in custody.

Donald Trump dismissed his latest indictment as a “witch hunt” and said he will release a report on election fraud in Georgia that will exonerate him. On Monday a grand jury in the state charged Mr Trump and his allies over attempts to overturn the 2020 election. Mr Trump, who is the frontrunner for the Republican nomination in the 2024 election, now faces four sets of criminal charges.

In Britain annual growth in basic pay reached 7.8% in the three months to June, according to official data—the highest pace since records began in 2001. The data also showed an unexpected rise in unemployment. Separate data by Kantar, a research company, showed grocery price inflation eased to 12.7% in the four weeks to August 6th, down 2.2 percentage points from the previous month.

Joe Biden, freshly back from vacation, said that he and his wife would travel to Hawaii “as soon as we can” without interfering in recovery efforts. The president has been criticised by political opponents for his response to last week’s wildfires, which killed at least 99 people. Hundreds remain unaccounted for. Josh Green, Hawaii’s governor, said that at least 2,200 buildings had been destroyed.

Good news for Swifties! A literature course dedicated to analysing Taylor Swift’s lyrics will be launched by Ghent University in Belgium. Titled “Literature: Taylor’s Version”, a riff on the artist’s re-recorded album names, the course is believed to be the first of its kind in Europe. Several colleges in America, including Stanford, already teach modules dedicated to “Swifterature”.

Figure of the day: 71%, the share of primary schools in England with girls’ or mixed football teams. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Jokowi’s state of Indonesia address
On Wednesday, the eve of Independence Day, Indonesia’s president, Joko Widodo, will give his ninth state-of-the-nation speech. Jokowi, as he is known, will use the opportunity to cement his legacy, drawing attention to Nusantara, the new capital in Borneo due to be inaugurated next year.

Jokowi’s second (and final) term as president is due to end next October. He is expected to leave office on a high. His focus on economic growth has been popular. Unlike previous presidents Jokowi comes from neither an establishment nor an army family and portrays himself as an ordinary Indonesian. Recent polling showed his popularity at around 80%, making him one of the best-liked leaders in the world.

The political jockeying to succeed him is under way. Jokowi has yet to endorse a candidate, but the possibles are falling over themselves to appear close to him, hoping his shine will be reflected onto them. Indonesian politics is notoriously unpredictable, but one thing is certain: Jokowi’s political influence will outlast his presidency.


PHOTO: EPA
Thailand’s political impasse persists
Three months have passed since a general election in Thailand, yet the country still has no new prime minister. After being trounced at the ballot box, the military establishment is rigging the system. It wants to keep Pita Limjaroenrat, the leader of the progressive Move Forward party, which won the most seats in May, from taking office. Move Forward promises to end the predominance of the armed forces and the monarchy in Thai politics. The senate, which is controlled by the military, has blocked Mr Pita’s bid.

On Wednesday the constitutional court will rule on an appeal from Move Forward. It claims attempts by pro-military lawmakers to block Mr Pita from renominating himself are unconstitutional. But even if the court rules in his favour, the military establishment is sure to find other ways to stop him. Pheu Thai, another pro-democracy party, which ran a close second, is now in talks with pro-military parties to form a government. Such is politics, Thai-style.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Europe’s stagnant, and divided, economy
In late July Eurostat, the EU’s statistics body, published its first estimate of GDP for the second quarter of 2023. Despite fears of a recession, it reported that the euro area’s economy grew by a surprisingly strong 0.3%, compared with the previous quarter. Of the zone’s big four, France and Spain both managed a healthy clip, whereas Germany’s GDP was flat and Italy’s shrank. A release on Wednesday of more reliable GDP figures for that same quarter may confirm this divergence.

Germany and Italy were hit hard by the energy crisis of 2022, and both still have inflation around 6.5%, compared with 5.3% in France and 1.6% in Spain. Their large manufacturing sectors also take a hit whenever the global economy weakens. Structurally, too, Germany and Italy face larger obstacles. Both countries’ populations are ageing so fast that their economies may struggle to find enough qualified workers. Time to get used to a new economic division in Europe.



PHOTO: ALAMY
Cisco tries to woo Wall Street
On Wednesday Cisco, an American software giant, reports full-year results. They are likely to be juicy: operating profits are expected to exceed $5bn, up by 23% year on year.

Yet Wall Street remains unimpressed. Cisco’s shares are up by only 12% this year, five percentage points behind the S&P 500. And they are 35 percentage points adrift of Cisco’s rival, Arista, which took full advantage when its cloud-data centres attracted big-tech companies like Amazon, Meta and Microsoft as customers first. Even worse, supply-chain troubles at Cisco contributed to a growing backlog of orders in May, hitting demand.

Cisco, which has yet to recover its dot-com bubble high, needs a boost. Now it is betting on supplying the mechanics of the AI revolution. In June the company launched a networking chip to help speed up the infrastructure that big-language models run on. Perhaps this time Wall Street will take notice.


PHOTO: SIMON & SCHUSTER
The life and works of August Wilson
August Wilson, who died in 2005, was one of the most important playwrights of the late 20th century. Works including his celebrated ten-play American Century Cycle, which chronicled the black American experience in each decade, are still finding new audiences on stage and screen.

Born into poverty with a mostly absent white father, Wilson tired of his condescending teachers and racist classmates, and dropped out of high school. His education came from the library and the pool hall, where the banter sounded like jazz and poetry. Wilson knew he was a writer, but was in his 30s when he realised he was a playwright. His characters talked to him: “I could hear the music.”

A biography published this week, “August Wilson: A Life”, by Patti Hartigan, offers a rich portrait of a complicated man who chain-smoked, womanised and procrastinated mercilessly but managed to carve timeless plays from the blood and sweat of black American life.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: What is the name for a baby kangaroo?

Tuesday: Which sculptor, the first woman to win the Turner prize, is best known for her cast of the inside of a terraced house?

To have news value is to have a tin can tied to one’s tail.

T.E. Lawrence
