The world in brief
September 5, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

President Vladimir Putin said that Russia would not rejoin the deal that allowed Ukraine to export grain across the Black Sea unless Western countries lift restrictions on Russian agricultural exports. His comments came after talks with Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, who has been trying to persuade Mr Putin to revive the agreement. Russia withdrew from the Turkey-brokered deal—which had allowed 33m tonnes of food products to reach global markets—on July 17th.

Kim Jong Un, North Korea’s leader, “expects” to meet Mr Putin in Russia, according to American officials. Earlier the New York Times reported that the reclusive Mr Kim would travel this month—probably by armoured train—to the far-eastern Russian city of Vladivostok. Mr Putin is seeking weapons from Mr Kim for Russia’s war against Ukraine; the Biden administration expressed concerns last week over a potential arms deal.

Oleksii Reznikov resigned as Ukraine’s defence minister. Volodymyr Zelensky, the president, will ask parliament to confirm Rostem Umerov, head of the state property fund, as his replacement. Rumours have long swirled about Mr Reznikov’s position. His deputy was fired in January amid allegations of corruption at the ministry, which Mr Reznikov has rejected.

Home sales in Shanghai and Beijing, China’s two largest cities, doubled this weekend compared to the previous one. Hoping to boost the country’s ailing property sector, last week China lowered the size of the deposits required for a mortgage. Meanwhile, shares in Country Garden, a struggling Chinese homebuilder, soared after it announced an agreement with some of its creditors to restructure repayments of onshore debts.

Brice Clotaire Oligui Nguema was sworn in as Gabon’s interim president a week after he led a coup that ousted Ali Bongo Ondimba, president since 2009. Mr Oligui, who previously commanded the elite Republican guard, promised elections but did not say when they would be held. He is a cousin of Mr Bongo, whose family has ruled Gabon for 55 years.

Annual inflation in Turkey spiked to 59% in August, up from 48% in July and the highest rate since December. On August 24th the central bank raised interest rates from 17.5% to 25%, a much bigger increase than markets had expected. The new figures will put pressure on the bank—which has recently shifted towards a more orthodox monetary policy—to hike again.

Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, said that wolves in Europe had become a “real danger” for livestock and potentially people, and promised to review the animal’s protected status. Wolves were once nearly extinct across Europe but an EU ban on hunting the species in 1992 triggered a spurt in their population. Wolves killed Mrs von der Leyen’s pony, Dolly, last September.

Figure of the day: 12,500. The global stockpile of nuclear warheads in 2023; that is down from 70,400 in 1986. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
ASEAN slides further into irrelevance
The ten-country Association of South-East Asian Nations meets for its twice-yearly talkfest in Jakarta, Indonesia’s capital, on Tuesday. But South-East Asians are becoming increasingly disappointed by the region’s leading multilateral organisation, which is looking slow and ineffective.

This is clearest in ASEAN’s inconsistent handling of Myanmar, which plunged into civil war after a military coup in February 2021. Members are divided: the more democratic are more critical of Myanmar’s junta than the authoritarian rest. After ASEAN suspended Myanmar’s generals from its top meetings in 2022, Thailand broke ranks to lead a separate dialogue with the junta late last year.

ASEAN has also struggled to negotiate a binding code of conduct in the South China Sea with China, which frequently bullies its maritime neighbours. President Joe Biden will skip this week’s summit, despite last year saying that ASEAN was “at the heart” of his Indo-Pacific strategy. With each passing year, ASEAN risks fading further into irrelevance.


PHOTO: AP
Will Texas Republicans oust one of their own?
On Tuesday the Texas Senate will hear arguments on whether Ken Paxton, the state’s attorney-general, has committed crimes including bribery and dereliction of duty while in office. He denies wrongdoing.

The case centres on Mr Paxton’s relationship with a property developer, who allegedly funded his political campaign and bankrolled his house renovations in exchange for legal favours. Aides in the attorney-general’s office, who reported their boss’s dealings to the FBI, were fired in 2020. In May 60 Republican representatives joined Democrats in voting to impeach Mr Paxton in the House. A Senate conviction, which requires just over a two-thirds majority, would probably remove him from office.

Mr Paxton is known for an unrelenting legal crusade against the Biden administration and helping to pull state politics further to the right. The trial will test what it takes for Texan Republicans, who have controlled the legislature since 2003, to turn on one of their own.


PHOTO: VDA/IAA MOBILITY
A motor-industry show in Munich
The Frankfurt Motor Show was once one of the car industry’s greatest get-togethers. But dwindling visitor numbers and some carmakers’ wariness among about the costs involved saw its organisers say in 2020 that it would not return. They designed another summit, IAA Mobility, the second of which officially opens in Munich on Tuesday, to fill the void. It claims to contrast with traditional motor shows like Frankfurt by focusing on all types of transport, bringing displays of cars together with bikes, e-scooters and other electric vehicles.

In reality, the new event still aims to give Germany’s carmakers an opportunity to puff out their chests on home soil. Yet the summit will probably lack the pomp of the Frankfurt show in its heyday. And the Germans now have to jostle for space with Chinese insurgents that have an eye on European customers in the EV market. IAA Mobility may struggle to match the scale of the past.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Airbnb takes a hit in New York
“It’s my house,” says Gia Sharp, who rents out part of her home on Airbnb. “The thought that someone else can tell me what I can do with my house is a little crazy.” But from Tuesday, her listing and at least 35,000 others in New York City may disappear from Airbnb and other short-term rental platforms.

A new municipal law requires rentals of 30 days or less to be registered with city authorities. Hosts must be in the property during the stay and guests must have full access to the space. Critics say registration is onerous. According to Skift, a travel news site, only 3,250 hosts have applied and 257 have been approved so far. The law’s proponents say it will stamp out illegal rentals, which worsen the city’s affordable-housing shortage. Airbnb, which has weathered restrictions in Berlin, San Francisco and elsewhere, unsuccessfully fought the law in court. The firm calls it a “de facto ban”.



PHOTO: HAMISH HAMILTON / PENGUIN BOOKS
Zadie Smith’s interrogation of history
Zadie Smith’s sixth novel, “The Fraud”, is inspired by a real-life court case from 1873 in which a seemingly uneducated British butcher claimed to be Sir Roger Tichborne, the presumed-drowned heir to a grand estate. Masses of Britons cheered on the self-declared aristocrat as if he was one of their own. Ms Smith uses the case to interrogate the paradoxical appeal of elite men—or those who act like them—speaking for the common man.

After a Jamaican former slave testifies on behalf of the claimant, the novel moves from stuffy English parlours to Caribbean sugar plantations. In chronicling how African slaves lost their names and often their lives toiling for their British owners, Ms Smith considers a more profound fraud than a butcher’s claim to wealth. The author brings to the surface stories of the slavery that roiled beneath British polite society—and uses fiction to examine the fictions the country still tells itself about its past.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.


Tuesday: Which woman is the national personification of the French republic?


Monday: Which economist, who died earlier this year, won the Nobel prize for developing the hypothesis of rational expectations?

Idleness makes hours pass slowly and years swiftly. Activity makes the hours short and the years long.

Cesare Pavese
