The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (05:19 GMT+1 / 12:19 Hong Kong)

The S&P 500 index increased by 9.1% in July as stockmarkets rebounded on Friday, its best monthly performance since November of 2020. The Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nasdaq Composite also posted monthly rises of 6.7% and 12%, respectively. Despite fears of a recession, markets were buoyed by the tech giants’ gains after Apple, Amazon, Microsoft and Alphabet reported earnings this week.

Ukraine and Russia blamed each other for the shelling of a prison which killed 53 Ukrainian prisoners of war. Ukraine said Russia had launched the attack to cover up evidence of Russian war crimes against imprisoned Ukrainians, and that claims to the contrary were part of Moscow’s “information war”. Russia said Ukraine had used American-supplied rockets against the prison, which is located in a Russian-controlled separatist region of Ukraine.

The top diplomats from America and Russia discussed the potential for a prisoner swap and safe passage for Ukrainian grain in their first call since the invasion began. Antony Blinken said he pressed Sergei Lavrov to release Brittney Griner, a women’s basketball star, and Paul Whelan, a former marine. The Kremlin would prefer to negotiate prisoner exchanges using “quiet diplomacy”, according to a statement from Russia’s foreign ministry.

The Securities and Exchange Commission added Alibaba, a Chinese e-commerce giant, to its list of firms that could be jettisoned from American stock exchanges. Alibaba’s share price fell at the news. China has refused to allow American inspectors to review audits of its listed companies. The row has prompted Chinese firms, including Alibaba, to seek primary listings in Hong Kong instead of New York.

Inflation in the euro zone rose to a record high 8.9%, stoked by the economic fallout from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The new numbers may spur the European Central Bank to hike interest rates again; last week the bank raised rates for the first time since 2011. Europe’s biggest economy, Germany, reported stagnant GDP figures for the second quarter of 2022; it is set to be the worst economic performer among G7 nations this year.

Belarus recalled its ambassador to Britain, accusing the British government of “hostile and unfriendly” actions. Belarus’s foreign ministry said Britain had executed policies “systematically aimed at causing maximum damage to Belarusian citizens and legal entities”, such as sanctions on Belarusian companies. Relations have soured after Belarus’s dictatorial ruler, Alexander Lukashenko, cracked down on opposition and cosied up to Russia.

President Joe Biden issued a disaster declaration for the state of Kentucky, where flash floods killed at least 16 people and destroyed hundreds of homes. Andy Beshear, the state’s governor, said the death toll would probably “get a lot higher”. Torrential rains battered towns this week across several states, including Missouri, Kentucky and Tennessee.

Word of the week: champing, the practice of camping in churches.

A boom for Britain’s energy producers

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Britain’s energy industry has had a mixed year. Some 30 suppliers went bust: bound to the country’s energy price cap, they were forced to sell power cheaply even as a cold winter and war in Ukraine pushed wholesale prices to dizzying highs.

But that helped other companies. In the first six months of 2022 Centrica, Britain’s biggest energy firm, raked in £1.3bn ($1.58bn) in operating profits, up from £262m in the same period last year. On Thursday, bosses issued a dividend for the first time since 2020, even as soaring energy bills force some Britons to choose between heating and eating. BP, another energy giant, is also expected to post strong results on Tuesday.

A new windfall tax on energy companies will redirect part of the bumper profits to consumers. But charities have warned that the complex logistics of the energy bills support scheme may exclude poorer households. With winter gas shortages looming, an increasing number of people may struggle to keep the lights on.

The cumbersome course of justice in Ethiopia

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The horrific civil war in Ethiopia has been plagued by war crimes since it began in 2020. Yet, despite repeated promises from the warring parties, which include the government and Tigrayan rebels, barely any justice has been served. The United Nations is hoping to rectify this. Following a brief visit to the country, a three-member commission will deliver a report on human-rights violations during the conflict on Saturday.

A thorough investigation—let alone redress—is unlikely. The commission, which has been rejected by the Ethiopian government, is hamstrung. It lacks staff and resources. Investigators have been prevented from visiting Tigray, the site of many of the worst atrocities. For now they are investigating only “emblematic incidents”, which mostly means massacres allegedly committed by rebels from the northern Tigray region (but includes the bombing of civilians by the Ethiopian air force). Meanwhile the horrors continue: last month ethnic Oromo rebels allegedly massacred hundreds of civilians in western Ethiopia.

A two-faced van Gogh

PHOTO: AP
Vincent van Gogh was not recognised as a genius in his short lifetime. The Dutch painter was often hard up. To cut back on the cost of canvases he sometimes painted on both their sides. That has led to a handful of his works—now extraordinarily valuable—emerging on the reverse side of other pieces. In July the National Galleries of Scotland discovered the first such work in Britain, when an image appeared, from under layers of glue and cardboard, on the back of the “Head of a Peasant Woman”, painted in 1885.

On Saturday the world’s newest Van Gogh will be shown to the public. Its subject, a familiar-looking bearded man in a brimmed hat, is an example of another penny-pinching measure. The artist would paint self-portraits to save on the cost of hiring models. Exposing the painting properly will require tricky conservation work. For now, visitors to the museum in Edinburgh will have to content themselves with a ghostly X-ray image.

Weekend profile: Pragg, India’s chess superstar

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
In February, Rameshbabu Praggnanandhaa, a 16-year-old Indian, became the youngest person to defeat Magnus Carlsen, a five-time world chess champion and giant of the game. Any victory over Mr Carlsen is remarkable but this was comprehensive, taking just 39 moves. Chess has a rich history of such precocious exploits—Mr Carlsen himself was a teenage prodigy. But in India, a country starved of sporting success outside cricket, Pragg, as he is commonly known, became an instant superstar. On Twitter, Narendra Modi, the prime minister, and Sachin Tendulkar, a celebrated former cricketer, gushed praise.

Although young, Pragg’s stardom has been a while in the making. He started playing at the age of three when his father, a bank employee, introduced chess to the household to distract his sister from watching TV. By the age of seven Pragg began showing signs of genius, so his father enrolled him in a chess academy—easy enough in Chennai, one of south India’s biggest cities and a breeding ground for chess champions (Viswanathan Anand, India’s best-ever player, is also a Chennaiite).

The head of the academy, RB Ramesh, a world-class player himself, was struck by his student’s dedication. While his other charges struggled to watch the ten videos he demanded of them each day, Pragg would watch 30. In between hours-long practices of complex chess manoeuvres, the pair would take a break by indulging in more child-like pursuits: playing hide-and-seek.

The hard work paid off. At ten Pragg became the youngest-ever international master, the second-highest title in chess. Two years later he became the second-youngest player to secure the game’s highest: grandmaster. In 2019, when barely 14, he became the world under-18 champion.

This weekend he will continue his chase for glory when he competes with 2,000 players, including Mr Carlsen, at the Chess Olympiad, which started on Thursday in Mahabalipuram, near Chennai. In his matches, he will sport what has become his trademark look, sacred ash on his forehead, dabbed there for good luck. He scarcely needs it.

Weekend crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Cryptic clues

1 down Grandmother on icy slope tumbled into top of house (5,6)

1 across Agency includes 500 questions for investors (6)

2 across Endless district in France? (5)

3 across Land on the Mediterranean is not a fantasy, we’re told (6)

Factual clues

1 down A fine emissary to Rome, according to some Washington Kremlinologists (5,6)

1 across Down by a quarter since January? (6)

2 across Where Prince Sultan boarded the flight on which he was kidnapped in 2016? (5)

3 across Home to a large Russian-speaking diaspora (6)

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown the winners in next week’s edition. The winners of last week’s crossword were:

Rajesh Raman, Singapore

Corien Kershey, Ottawa, Canada

Jaime Jean, Mexico City, Mexico

John Pierce, Wexford, Ireland

Sean Hennessey, Runaway Bay, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Lukashenko, likes, SSRI and Obama.


The winner’s of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Tetsuyuki Maruyama, Ito, Japan

North America: Qin Lin, New York City, USA

Central and South America: Antonio Lemos, Petropolis, Brazil

Europe: Arne Tobias Ødegaard, Bergen, Norway

Africa: Christine Reiter, Tunis, Tunisia

Oceania: Warren Twohey, Auckland, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of flags, Minnie Driver, Hitler’s bunker, Chip and Dale, and Eagle. The theme is golf: flags, driver, bunker, chip and eagle.

Clubbing together for Ukraine

PHOTO: COURTESY OF ZENNER BERLIN
Most people go to nightclubs to be carefree, raving to electronic beats amid the anonymity of a darkened dancefloor. But on Saturday party-goers visiting Zenner, a club in Berlin, will be dancing for a purpose. Closer, a famous techno institution in Kyiv, is hosting the first of two fundraising events for the war in Ukraine. It will feature Ukrainian and international artists and a room in the basement made to look like a bomb shelter.

Maintaining international support for Ukraine’s struggle is one way that the country’s musicians are doing their bit. Back home, shuttered nightclubs in cities such as Kyiv and Dnipro have found new purpose, as storages for food, medicine and military supplies. Ukrainian techno has long been associated with politics and protest: the gritty “Cxema” raves were born out of the Maidan Revolution of 2014, the year Russia annexed Crimea. The Kremlin has sought to erase Ukraine’s culture. That will be impossible—especially when it thrives underground.

I think that I shall never see a poem lovely as a tree.

Joyce Kilmer
