The world in brief
May 13, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Ukraine said it recaptured territory in Bakhmut, potentially signalling a change in momentum in the battle for the eastern town, which has grinded on for more than nine months. A Ukrainian military spokesperson said that Russian troops had been pushed back one and a half kilometres in the past day. Russia’s defence ministry said it had pulled away for strategic reasons. But Yevgeny Prigozhin, the head of the Wagner Group, a Russian mercenary outfit, said Russian units were “running away”.

Elon Musk named Linda Yaccarino, the advertising chief at NBC Universal, as Twitter’s new chief executive. Mr Musk—a billionaire who reluctantly acquired Twitter for $44bn in October—resigned as chief executive on Thursday. He has been under pressure from shareholders in Tesla, of which he is also CEO, to refocus on the company. The electric-vehicle company’s stock jumped 2% on the appointment news.

The number of migrants crossing to Europe through the central Mediterranean has quadrupled compared with last year, according to Frontex. The EU’s borders agency reported 28,000 arrivals by the sea route—which accounts for more than half of irregular crossings—in the first quarter of 2023. The UN called it the deadliest period since 2017.

Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, agreed to strengthen ties with Cyril Ramaphosa, his South African counterpart, according to the Kremlin. In a call between the leaders Mr Putin also said he had never refused the “diplomatic track” to resolving the war in Ukraine and voiced support for involving African leaders in peace negotiations. On Thursday America accused South Africa of supplying weapons to Russia.

Imran Khan, a former prime minister of Pakistan, was granted a two-week bail by the Islamabad High Court, a day after the Supreme Court deemed his arrest unlawful. Mr Khan was detained on Tuesday by the country’s anti-graft agency on corruption charges. He denies any wrongdoing. The dramatic detention triggered protests across the country, in which at least 11 people were killed and nearly 2,000 arrested.

After a week of talks, Sudan’s warring factions failed to agree to a ceasefire, but promised to protect civilians. Fighting between Sudan’s army and the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary unit, has killed more than 750 people over the past month. Both sides signed a declaration saying they would work towards a ceasefire in further discussions.

Justin Tkatchenko, Papua New Guinea’s foreign minister, resigned after the cost and size of his country’s delegation to King Charles III’s coronation sparked public outrage. A 30-person delegation travelled to London for the bash, each of whom was given a 50,000 kina ($14,000) allowance. Although a resource-rich country, almost 40% of PNG’s population lives in poverty, according to the World Bank.

Word of the week: sledging, what cricketers call trash talking. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
DeSantis and Trump duel in Iowa
The last time Donald Trump travelled to Iowa, in March, he missed Ron DeSantis, his rival for the Republican party’s presidential nomination, by three days. Their visits will overlap on Saturday, though. Mr Trump will host a campaign rally (“the hottest ticket in town”, he promises), while Mr DeSantis, not yet an official candidate, will appear at local Republican fundraisers.

Both have been busy since their last stops in Iowa. Mr DeSantis, Florida’s governor, made trips well outside his constituency, to Britain, Israel and Japan. He signed ultra-conservative legislation and escalated his fight with Disney. Yet because his opponent is Mr Trump, that all seems tame by comparison. Mr Trump was criminally indicted, then found liable for sexually abusing a woman (whom, the day after the verdict, he called a “whack job” on national television). Republican primary voters seem to prefer the drama: Mr Trump leads Mr DeSantis by 26 percentage points in the latest polls.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Thailand’s general election
For decades Thailand has see-sawed between periods of vibrant electoral democracy and military dictatorship. The army most recently seized control of a democratically elected government in 2014, promising to strengthen the economy. Instead, over the past decade Thailand has been defined by incompetence and corruption.

Many Thais believe that their country, which was once considered a South-East Asian leader, is falling behind. This weekend they will get the chance to voice their dissatisfaction in a general election.

Pheu Thai, Thailand’s largest opposition party, is expected to sweep to victory. It is linked to Thaksin Shinawatra, a tycoon-turned-prime minister, who was ousted by a coup in 2006. His daughter, Paetongtarn Shinawatra, is the party’s candidate for prime minister. Despite Pheu Thai’s popularity, it may not be able to form a government because of the country’s rigged constitution. It gives the senate, which is packed with military loyalists, an outsized say in selecting the prime minister. A crisis could be looming.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Keeping tabs on South America’s birdlife
On Saturday birdwatchers worldwide will flock outdoors for “global big day”. As part of the world’s biggest bird-spotting initiative, they will submit sightings to an app which, in turn, will help update eBird, an online database. The event was hatched in 2015 by Cornell University to better understand avian populations.

Colombia and Peru are, as usual, vying to be named the country with the greatest number of bird species spotted in a single day. Only two other countries, Brazil and Ecuador, have ever come close to bagging the crown—testament to the biodiversity of South America, home to almost a third of all bird species. But modern farming, deforestation and climate change are driving a global decline in bird populations. Five of the ten countries with the greatest number of threatened species are in Latin America, and include Colombia and Peru. By tracking their decline, spotters are helping to save the creatures they love.


PHOTO: BBC
How to win Eurovision
Explaining the Eurovision Song Contest—which hosts its Grand Final on Saturday—to the uninitiated is easy: it is a cheesy pop fest that is low quality, high camp, and involves singers from across Europe (plus countries such as Australia and Israel). Champions are crowned by a jury and the public. Understanding how to win them over is trickier.

There have been two periods (1966-1972 and 1977-1998) during which contest rules required countries to sing in their own languages. But from 1999 participants have consistently been allowed to belt tunes in any tongue. Our analysis of songs performed since then shows that there is some benefit to singing in English, and even more if you can manage a hybrid. On average, songs in a language other than English receive 7% fewer points than all-English ones—but those, in turn, score 3% worse than tracks blending English with another language. But lyrics only matter so much; politics means that allies can usually count on each other’s votes. Winning Eurovision may require favourable foreign relations and a catchy English chorus.



PHOTO: EYEVINE
Weekend profile: Martin Griffiths, UN mediator
Talks to resolve the devastating conflict in Sudan began in Saudi Arabia’s coastal city of Jeddah last weekend. But so far representatives of the two warring factions—the army led by General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan and the Rapid Support Forces led by the warlord Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo—as well as American and Saudi diplomats, have struggled for a breakthrough. They have only managed to sign a declaration committing to protect civilians. The intense fighting, which has left over 600 dead and thousands more injured since April 15th, could well continue. It is familiarly unpromising territory for the other attendee at the talks, Martin Griffiths, the UN’s leading troubleshooter and perhaps the world’s most experienced mediator.

The slightly crumpled, silver-haired 71-year-old Welshman is a familiar presence at the world’s hotspots. If Sudan wasn’t tough enough, after a few days in Jeddah Mr Griffiths jetted off to Turkey to sit down with the Ukrainians and Russians to negotiate an extension of the Black Sea grain deal (it expires on May 18th). He is now the UN’s top humanitarian official, a job he took in 2021 after three years as the secretary-general’s special envoy to war-torn Yemen.

Mr Griffiths trained as a barrister and later worked for NGOs, such as Action Aid, and for the British Foreign Office. It is this unusual combination that has made him effective: he deploys the skills of a hard-nosed political operator in the humanitarian causes of famine relief or peace-building, and is comfortable in the cloak-and-dagger world of back channels and intelligence work that is often required for conflict resolution. In 1999 he co-founded the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue (HD), a discrete mediation outfit. It became a model for an entire industry, outsourcing conflict mediation to private organisations rather than governments. With HD, Mr Griffiths was closely involved in peace talks in the Indonesian province of Aceh, and supported Kofi Annan’s successful mediation in Kenya after post-election violence in 2008 threatened to rip the country apart.

In Sudan, his main job is to negotiate a “humanitarian pause”, a temporary cessation of hostilities to allow food and aid to be distributed to an immiserated population. But the hope is that such ceasefire agreements can lead to political talks. Mr Griffith’s job in Yemen started brightly as he persuaded the warring parties to allow access to a crucial port, but a wider agreement was never fully implemented. The world must hope that he has better luck in Sudan.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist.

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down With God, luck and lira, I could become president (12)

1 across Knock back tot before hijack (6)

2 across Flying machine, done right, explodes (5)

3 across In huff I zipped to gallery (6)

Factual clues

1 down Candidate hoping to replace Recep Tayyip Erdogan (12)

1 across What Mexican gangs do to some migrants (6)

2 across Civilian device weaponised by Ukrainians (5)

3 across Italian gallery sending art out on the road (6)



The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Erik Feng, Austin, Texas, United States

Nagia El Harai, Cairo, Egypt

Kobchai Kingchatchaval, Bangkok, Thailand

They all gave the correct answers of Victor Borge, Quebec, November criminals, Nile delta and Zulus. The theme is terms in the NATO phonetic alphabet: Victor, Quebec, November, delta and Zulu.

The questions were:

Monday: Which pianist, who performed a routine called “phonetic punctuation”, was known as the “clown prince of Denmark”?
Tuesday: Which is Canada’s largest province by area?
Wednesday: What pejorative term was given to the German politicians who signed the armistice at the end of the first world war?
Thursday: Which historically important geographic formation spans from Alexandria in the west to Port Said in the east?
Friday: Jacob Zuma and Mangosuthu Buthelezi are members of which South African ethnic group?

Walking is a virtue, tourism is a deadly sin.

Bruce Chatwin
