The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 18, 2023

Big banks’ fourth-quarter earnings reflected a slowdown in dealmaking activity amidst high interest rates and fears of a coming recession. Profits at Goldman Sachs, which recently conducted a round of lay-offs, fell by 66% from the same period a year ago, to $1.3bn. The bank’s share price slumped by 6%. Morgan Stanley’s profits fell by 40% year over year, to $2.2bn, but managed to beat expectations.

Russia’s defence minister said its army would expand by 30%, to 1.5m troops, in the next three years. Karelia, on the border with Finland, will get its own army corps. Separately, the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, committed to sending Ukraine a Patriot missile-defence system, as America and Germany have done, or training Ukrainian troops on how to use it.

Brazil’s president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, dismissed 40 troops who guard his official residence after criticising the country’s armed forces for failing to stop the recent insurrection. Last week Lula described security forces as “complicit” in the storming of government buildings on January 8th. The presidential-residence guards are mainly from the army.

Pier Antonio Panzeri, a former MEP from Italy, agreed to a plea deal with Belgian prosecutors regarding the influence-peddling scheme involving Qatar that has gripped the European Parliament. The prosecutors’ spokesperson said he would serve a light jail sentence, of a year, in exchange for divulging who paid whom. After his career as a lawmaker Mr Panzeri founded a human-rights charity called Fight Impunity.

Oleksiy Arestovych, a senior Ukrainian presidential adviser, resigned after suggesting that Ukrainian air defences had shot down the Russian missile that hit an apartment building in Dnipro. Russian officials used his comments to blame Ukraine for the strike, which killed at least 44 people. Ukraine counters that the missile in question was a Russian Kh-22—a model that their defences cannot shoot down.

Nguyen Xuan Phuc, the president of Vietnam, resigned. The ruling Communist Party accused him of being responsible for “wrongdoings” committed by senior ministers who worked for him before he became President. He is the latest in a series of officials to leave office in an anti-corruption crackdown orchestrated by the government. In 2022, 539 party members were prosecuted for corruption.

Xpeng, a Chinese electric vehicle manufacturer, lowered the price of some of its models by up to 12.5% for the domestic market. The move comes after two competitors, Tesla and Seres, cut prices earlier this month. China churns out more electric vehicles than any other country, but Chinese EV makers may struggle to maintain sales as demand in the country is forecast to fall in the coming months.

Fact of the day: 37%, the proportion of Brazilians in favour of a coup to remove President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, according to one poll. Read the full story.

What’s next for Japanese monetary policy

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Markets will be watching keenly on Wednesday when the Bank of Japan announces the outcome of its latest board meeting. The central bank had a shock in store in December, when it widened the band for ten-year bond yields under its yield-curve control (YCC) policy. Kuroda Haruhiko, the governor, claimed the change was intended to improve the functionality of bond markets. But many saw it as a step towards normalising the bank’s ultra-loose monetary policy. Yields have already risen to the new upper limit of 0.5% in recent weeks, as investors test the new target. They have forced the bank to spend trillions of yen buying bonds to defend YCC.

The bank may decide to hold firm. But it could also try further tweaks, such as widening the yield band again, making the target more flexible or shifting from targeting ten-year yields to five-year ones. Or Mr Kuroda could surprise everyone by ditching YCC altogether.

Sergei Lavrov talks up Russia’s achievements

PHOTO: AFP
Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, holds his annual press conference on Wednesday. It is a chance for the veteran diplomat to summarise what his spokesman calls the country’s “main foreign policy results” over the last year. Given Russia’s faltering invasion of Ukraine, observers may wonder if there’s much to boast about. But Mr Lavrov will not be daunted. Such conferences have increasingly become occasions for discussing the Kremlin’s favourite subject: why the treacherous West, not Russia, is to blame for Europe’s ills.

Yet beneath the rhetoric Mr Lavrov must be aware of the rising costs of Russia’s international isolation. The country’s influence in its own backyard, the south Caucasus and Central Asia, has diminished. Leaders from traditionally friendly powers in Asia, namely China and India, have made barbed comments about the effects of Russia’s folly. And far from backing down, NATO looks set to add Finland and Sweden to its membership. In truth, Russia’s leaders only have themselves to blame.

More knocks for the NHS

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Britain’s National Health Service is once more breaking records, for all the wrong reasons. In December people who suffered a medical emergency such as a suspected heart attack waited an average of 93 minutes for an ambulance (the target is 18 minutes). Over 54,000 waited to be admitted to hospital even after the decision to admit them had been made. The NHS is often accused of being “in crisis”, but this is a particularly terrible winter.

Staff have had enough. On Wednesday nurses will begin their second round of strikes, with further action planned in February. Ambulance workers will walk out on January 23rd; physiotherapists three days later (when their ballot closes on Thursday, junior doctors, too, will probably follow suit). The disputes will only be resolved with better pay, and that might also make a dent in the NHS’s biggest problem: staffing levels. Almost one in ten posts are vacant. That is one reason why an unprecedented 7m people are waiting for specialist treatment.


Trouble in the Amazon

PHOTO: AP
Starting on Wednesday Amazon, America’s second-largest private employer, will begin laying off over 18,000 of its 300,000-odd white-collar workforce, largely from its e-commerce and human resources divisions. The online-shopping giant’s jobs cuts are part of a broader white-collar recession that caused America’s tech companies to announce 150,000 lay-offs in 2022, according to Layoffs.fyi, a website tracking redundancies. This year may turn out to be even worse.

Rising interest rates have especially hurt tech stocks. Amazon has struggled to gain market share internationally and has been forced to slow down its roll-out of bricks-and-mortar stores.

Not everything is doom and gloom, however. Amazon’s cloud offering continues to dominate the market compared to Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud, its two main competitors. And starting on January 31st, Amazon will widen its “Buy with Prime” service, which allows online stores to take advantage of Amazon’s payment and delivery services, a way to fend off growing competition from Canada’s Shopify. It’s about time.

A rom-com in 140 words

PHOTO: ABOUT GRACE PR
How would you use language if you had a daily word limit equivalent to the length of an Espresso article? That’s the concept behind Sam Steiner’s “Lemons Lemons Lemons Lemons Lemons”, a dystopian romantic comedy about a couple navigating love, work and dissent in a society that restricts them to just 140 words a day. Originally staged in 2015, a new production opens on Wednesday in London.

The play was Mr Steiner’s breakthrough work, staged when he was just 21 years old. “Lemons” has since been translated into over a dozen languages, and its enduring popularity reflects how it speaks to different cultures. “Initially people thought it was about social media, later about austerity,” Mr Steiner remembers. This time he says “people’s minds may be drawn to how the pandemic changed the way we interact both personally and politically.” Word limit reached.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Who was the leader of the migrating rabbit group in the novel Watership Down?

Tuesday: Which English comedian played the almost silent character, Mr Bean?

Words are, of course, the most powerful drug used by mankind.

Rudyard Kipling
