The world in brief
April 12,  2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

America is assessing the source and scale of a leak of classified-intelligence files that could pose “a very serious risk to national security”. According to a spokesman for the Pentagon, officials are “working around the clock” to investigate how the documents were leaked online. They seem to reveal national-security information about Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, including data that could hamper Ukraine’s coming counter-offensive. America’s Justice Department has also opened an investigation into the issue.

The International Monetary Fund said that global growth would slow to 2.8% this year from 3.4% in 2022. The IMF blamed higher interest rates and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine for the weaker economic outlook, as well as last month’s banking crisis that saw both Silicon Valley Bank and Credit Suisse collapse. It expects the world economy to expand by 3% next year.

EY, the accounting-and-consulting giant, scrapped plans to separate its advisory and audit services into distinct firms. The proposal, known as Project Everest, sought to free both entities from conflict-of-interest rules. But opposition from partners in EY’s American business, which accounts for some 40% of the firm’s global revenue, scuttled the plan.

Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, called China “irresponsible” after it concluded three days of military drills around the island. In a statement posted on Facebook, Ms Tsai said the exercises, in which 91 Chinese aircraft flew into the island’s Air Defence Identification Zone, a buffer region, caused “instability”. Japan’s defence minister described them as “intimidating”.

Junior doctors working for Britain’s National Health Service began a four-day strike over low wages. The British Medical Association, the doctors’ union, is demanding a 35% pay rise, which the government has called unreasonable. Stephen Powis, the national medical director for the NHS in England, said the country’s health service faces “unparalleled levels of disruption”.

China’s tech regulator said that artificially intelligent chatbots would have to undergo a security review before being allowed to operate. The creators of generative AI models must also ensure their bots produce content that embodies socialist values and verify users’ identities. Earlier Alibaba unveiled Tongyi Qianwen, a large-language AI model that it plans to integrate into all of its business applications.

Britain’s government announced plans to provide smokers with free e-cigarettes to help them quit their harmful habit. The “swap to stop” programme will give vaping starter kits to 1m smokers; participants can choose their preferred flavour and strength. Britain aims to become smoke-free by 2030 (by which it means reducing the share of smokers to less than 5% of the population, compared with about 13% in 2021).

Fact of the day: $300m, the amount the energy industry spent on lobbying in America last year, the most since 2013. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Inflation cools in India
Like many of its counterparts around the world, India’s central bank has paused its monetary-policy tightening cycle. The announcement last week surprised markets: the annual inflation rate in February was 6.4%, which exceeds the Reserve Bank of India’s upper threshold of 6%. (Inflation has been above that level for much of the past year.) The RBI, however, is concerned that ongoing global financial turmoil could “weigh” on India’s growth.

The bank also believes that it now has some leeway thanks to six interest-rate rises in the past 12 months. Plus this year has brought a bumper crop harvest, which should ease pressure on prices. Inflation data released on Wednesday could validate the RBI’s stance. Inflation in March is expected to have fallen to 5.8%. Even so, that may only be a temporary reprieve. Oil prices, which have surged in recent weeks, could soon push up inflation—and force the bank back into action.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Illinois’s great patronage trial
On Wednesday the prosecution is expected to rest its case in one of Illinois’s most significant corruption trials in recent years. The defendants—two lobbyists and two former executives of ComEd, the state’s largest electricity provider—are accused of bribery. They deny all charges.

Although he is not present, the four are linked by Michael Madigan, former speaker of Illinois’s House of Representatives. Jurors at the federal courthouse in Chicago have heard evidence that Mr Madigan and the accused arranged jobs at the utility (requiring no or barely any work) for his allies in exchange for his help in passing ComEd’s legislative priorities. (Mr Madigan, who denies allegations of corruption, is expected to go on trial next year.)

The defence is expected to argue that the behaviour was a normal part of politics. The case will do little to clean up Illinois’s reputation for grubbiness. In 2011 Rod Blagojevich, the former governor, was sentenced to 14 years in prison for trying to sell the seat in the United States Senate that Barack Obama vacated to pursue the presidency.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
Finland’s parliament reconvenes
On Wednesday Finland’s parliament convenes for the first time since the country joined NATO on April 4th. That’s not the only change. An election on April 2nd also turfed out Sanna Marin, the Social Democrat prime minister. The National Coalition, a centre-right party, won the vote. To form a coalition its leader, Petteri Orpo, must choose between two parties as its main partner: the Social Democrats or the hard-right populist Finns Party. The latter is a better fit on economics, but sceptical towards the EU and opposed to immigration. The RKP party—which represents Finland’s Swedish-speaking minority and whose votes may be required to secure a coalition—will not join unless the Finns Party softens on those issues.

Picking the Social Democrats would create an alternative “red-blue” centrist government. But that seems unlikely: the electorate has shifted to the right, and leftist parties are treating the results as a rebuke. Ms Marin is stepping down as leader of the Social Democrats, the Greens’ leader is resigning and the head of Left Alliance, a socialist party, will not run again.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
New inflation figures in America
After a brief period of financial instability the American economy is returning to regular programming: the challenge of taming inflation. Figures published on Wednesday are expected to show that consumer prices rose by 5.2% year-on-year in March.

If so, that drop—from 6% in February—will be thanks largely to a decline in oil prices since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine just over a year ago. Core inflation, stripping out volatile energy and food costs, is expected to have remained elevated at about 0.4% month-on-month in March, making for an annualised rate of nearly 5%, more than double the Federal Reserve’s 2% target.

Even the cooling of oil prices might not be sustained; indeed, they have risen significantly this month. And the trouble at mid-sized banks, highlighted by Silicon Valley Bank’s collapse, may eventually weigh on America’s economy. Still, the government’s interventions to stabilise the banking sector have succeeded, for now. That should allow the Fed to continue raising interest rates until it is confident it has tackled inflation.


PHOTO: ALEX BELL
The relationship between mathematics and literature
In “Once Upon a Prime”, a book published this week, Sarah Hart explores the links between maths and literature. The author—who in 2020 became the first woman to hold the professorship in geometry at Gresham College in London—argues that paying attention to numbers can open up new meanings in novels and poems. She analyses the role maths plays in literary works such as “Life of Pi” and “Moby Dick”.

The book shows how seemingly random dates and figures can contain clues for the reader or hint at a story’s theme. It also offers answers to some creative conundrums. Could 42 really be the answer to life, the universe and everything, as pondered in “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy”, a novel by Douglas Adams? How big would a library have to be to hold every conceivable book on earth, as imagined by Jorge Luis Borges, an Argentine writer? Professor Hart tackles these questions with the rigour of a mathematician—and the wit and creativity of a writer.


Daily Quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Wednesday: What style of poetry, which often expresses personal feelings, encompasses elegies, odes and sonnets?

Tuesday: Which river, with a source in the Adirondack mountains, flows into New York’s harbour?

All of us alive are survivors, but how many of us transcend survival?

Joan Baez
