The world in brief
September 13, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Kevin McCarthy, the Republican speaker of America’s House of Representatives, directed Republican-led House committees to open an impeachment inquiry into President Joe Biden. Mr McCarthy, bowing to pressure from hardliners in his party, said the inquiry would focus on “allegations of abuse of power, obstruction and corruption” into Mr Biden. The Republicans have attempted to tie some of Mr Biden’s activities during his time as vice-president to the questionable business practices of his son, Hunter Biden. The White House says there is no basis for an investigation.

North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong Un, arrived in Russia by train to meet with President Vladimir Putin, according to the Kremlin and a video uploaded to Telegram. American officials say the two leaders will likely discuss the provision of weapons by North Korea to aid Russia’s war in Ukraine. Such transfers would violate UN Security Council resolutions.

America’s Department of Justice began its case against Google in a major antitrust trial. The case centres on a deal which makes Google the default search engine on Apple devices. In his opening statement, Kenneth Dintzer, the lead attorney for the DoJ, argued that Google has “illegally maintained a monopoly for more than a decade”. A ruling is expected next year.

All 15 of Israel’s Supreme Court judges convened, for the first time ever, to hear arguments on an amendment to a law limiting the power of courts to overturn government decisions on the basis of “reasonableness”. The amendment is part of a controversial legal reform package by the government of Binyamin Netanyahu, the prime minister. A ruling could take months.

The supplemental child poverty measure in America “more than doubled” from 5.2% in 2021 to 12.4% in 2022, according to a new report from the Census Bureau. Median household income after taxes also fell by 8.8% last year. The bureau attributes the stark numbers to the expiration of pandemic-era tax relief policies, which it says has impacted poorer households the most.

In eastern Libya some 10,000 people have been reported missing after Storm Daniel caused severe flooding and burst dams in the region, according to the Red Cross. The death toll in Derna is already over 2,000, but officials expect it to rise—about a quarter of the city has reportedly been completely wiped out.

Bernard Looney resigned as the chief executive of BP with “immediate effect”, the company announced. He admitted to not being “fully transparent” in disclosing alleged personal relationships with colleagues. Mr Looney, who had ambitious plans for the British oil major when he became its boss in 2020, will be replaced in the interim by Murray Auchincloss, the firm’s CFO.

Figure of the day: 35m tonnes, the amount of green metal required each year if the world is to be carbon neutral in 2050. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
American headline inflation picks up again
At first glance it is going to look bad. Data released on Wednesday are expected to show that American consumer prices in August rose 0.6% from July, the fastest month-on-month increase since mid-2022. The obvious worry will be that inflationary pressures are again ratcheting up. But a closer look at the figures will be more reassuring.

The jump is largely because of surging gas prices. Stripping out volatile food and energy costs, core inflation will probably be milder. Analysts forecast a 0.2% month-on-month increase in core prices, roughly the same as the previous two months and putting America within spitting distance of its 2% inflation target.

Combined with signs of slower growth, that should be enough to reassure the Federal Reserve that it need not raise interest rates when it meets later this month. But the ugly headline figure will be a bracing reminder that it is still too soon to declare victory.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The state of the European Union
After its long summer break, Europe’s policymaking juggernaut will be back in action on Wednesday as Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, delivers her annual “state of the union” speech in Strasbourg.

Expect fresh guidance on the EU’s long-stalled process of enlargement. Adding Ukraine, Moldova and up to six Western Balkan countries, including Serbia and Albania, into the 27-member union might involve changes in how the bloc operates, such as giving national governments fewer vetoes. Mrs von der Leyen is also expected to opine on whether the bloc should continue to pass ambitious environmental legislation, despite some in her own centre-right party calling for a “regulatory pause”.

Finally, with European Parliament elections coming up in June, look for an indication of whether Mrs von der Leyen, a former German defence minister, will try to convince EU national leaders and members of the European Parliament she would like to be considered for a second term. A speech focused on her solid track record since 2019 would indicate she is keen to stay on.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
William Ruto’s first year in power
Wednesday marks William Ruto’s first year as president of Kenya. In Western capitals, at least, his previous record hardly inspired confidence. Mr Ruto was indicted by the International Criminal Court for helping to instigate violence after a previous election (a charge he denied, and the case collapsed). Yet as president he has proved a dependable ally to the West, reliably voting against Russia at the UN. When other African leaders hurried to a summit with Vladimir Putin in July, Mr Ruto stayed home. When America appealed for help in Haiti, he offered 1,000 police officers.

Kenyans, however, are unhappy. Elected on a promise to champion the poor, he has presided over a cost-of-living crisis. When violent protests broke out against Mr Ruto’s tax increases in July, his security forces responded with gunfire, killing at least 27 people. A recent opinion poll suggests that only 15% of Kenyans think that under Mr Ruto their country is heading in the right direction.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Britain’s improving economy
Until recently the prevailing economic mood in Britain had been one of unremitting gloom. The economy was hit hard by the pandemic and experienced a more tepid recovery than its international peers. Britain seemed to be a laggard among the G7 group of rich countries. But the gloom is starting to evaporate. The Office for National Statistics, which produces the official data, rewrote recent economic history at the start of this month, revising up the numbers for 2020 and 2021.

Britain’s relative performance now looks more respectable. Lower inflation and faster wage growth have bucked up consumers too, with barometers of their confidence climbing away from record lows. But conditions are still tough. Interest rates have increased at the fastest pace in decades. Surveys of purchasing managers at firms point to weakness ahead. GDP numbers for July, due on Wednesday, are expected to show a small contraction. That will add to the sense that Britain is not out of the woods yet.



PHOTO: HULU/PLANET PHOTOS
A blockbuster novel on television
Few authors have a smash hit with their debut novel. But Zakiya Dalila Harris, an American writer, is one of them. In 2020, 14 American publishers entered a bidding war for the rights to “The Other Black Girl”. Atria, part of Simon & Schuster, prevailed, forking out more than $1m for the book. In Britain there was a nine-way auction and a six-figure sum. The novel instantly became a New York Times bestseller. On Wednesday a television adaptation arrives on Hulu, a streamer.

The story follows Nella, an editorial assistant at Wagner Books, who is delighted when another young black woman, Hazel, joins the team. But when she starts receiving anonymous notes on her desk, and Hazel starts undermining her, Nella fears that her position is under threat. Ms Harris was inspired by her stint working in publishing in New York—though she admits she “did not have it nearly as bad” as her protagonist. Writing what you know evidently pays off.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: What is the name for a mariner who guides ships into port?

Tuesday: What is the most expensive type of caviar?

Monday: What is the common name for the male reproductive cell, or gamete?

Art attracts us only by what it reveals of our most secret self.

Jean-Luc Godard
