The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 9, 2023

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, repeated calls for the West to supply fighter jets to his country during an address to Britain’s Parliament. Ukraine’s Western allies have so far refused to send jets, though Britain said it will train Ukrainian pilots. Mr Zelensky also met Britain’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, and King Charles III during his surprise visit to London. He is due to travel to Paris to meet France’s President, Emmanuel Macron, and Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor.

The death toll from the large earthquakes that struck parts of Turkey and Syria on Monday passed 11,000 and looks certain to rise further. Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, visited the Turkish provinces worst affected by the disaster. America, China and countries across Asia and Europe sent specialist help to support the rescue efforts.

Disney said revenues for the past quarter—during which Bob Iger returned to the helm—rose by 8% year over year to $23.5bn, beating expectations. Net income was $1.3bn. Losses at the streaming unit, which includes Disney+, totalled $1.1bn. The number of Disney + subscribers dipped from the previous quarter to 161.8m. The media giant said it would sack 7,000 people, about 3% of its global staff.

International investigators said there were “strong indications” that Vladimir Putin himself approved the supply of anti-aircraft weapons that downed flight MH17 over eastern Ukraine in 2014 to the pro-Russian separatists who fired them. All 298 people on board the Malaysian Airlines flight were killed. Russia has denied involvement; prosecutors said they could not bring criminal proceedings against Mr Putin.

The share price of Alphabet, Google’s parent company, fell by nearly 8% after a demonstration of its new AI-powered chatbot underwhelmed investors. Called Bard, it answered one query inaccurately. On Tuesday Microsoft unveiled an AI-enhanced version of its Bing search engine in an attempt to win market share in web search from Google.

Uber reported higher-than-expected earnings in the final quarter of 2022, the first in which the American ride-sharing and delivery company carried out more than 2bn trips worldwide. Overall revenues rose 49% compared with the previous year, to $8.6bn, above analysts’ estimates of $8.5bn. The company said record numbers of drivers and couriers are using its platform.

Britain’s competition regulator warned that Microsoft’s $69bn acquisition of Activision Blizzard, a video-game developer, risks “higher prices” and “less innovation” for consumers. It suggested that the deal could go ahead if Activision divested parts of its business; Microsoft has called its concerns misplaced. Earlier America’s Federal Trade Commission said it would seek to block the deal.

Fact of the day: 8m, the number of people displaced by Pakistan’s monsoon flooding last summer. Read the full story.

Zelensky goes to Brussels

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Leaders of the European Union’s 27 member states will convene in Brussels on Thursday. President Volodymyr Zelensky, who would dearly like Ukraine to become the bloc’s 28th member, is expected to make a rare in-person visit. He is also due to address the European Parliament. On Wednesday he made unexpected trips to London and Paris.

For their tenth meeting in under a year European leaders will discuss how to keep aiding Ukraine with weapons, cash and—one day—EU accession. Then they will squabble over migration. A surge in arrivals has prompted some countries, most recently Bulgaria, to demand the bloc build more fences around its outer borders. Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, among others, feels that is rather too Trumpian. The EU also needs to agree how to respond to the giant green subsidies recently enacted by America. Fighting them with European ones is one possibility, but might undermine the EU's vaunted single market.

Adani Enterprises reports its earnings

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Thursday Adani Enterprises will report its results for the last quarter of 2022. It will be its first earnings call since Hindenburg Research critiqued the finances of the Adani Group, of which Adani Enterprises is a part. The Indian conglomerate has forcefully denied Hindenburg’s allegations.

Adani will undoubtedly use the event to try to assuage investors. On Monday it announced that it would repay 19 months ahead of schedule a $1.1bn loan that was taken out using shares in some of the group’s companies as collateral. (It was later reported that it had faced a margin call for $500m.) Yet shares in some of the group’s companies continue to gyrate. The market value of the Adani Group has fallen by about half since the report; its founder, Gautam Adani, has lost billions.

India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, has been silent about the trials of Mr Adani, a close associate, and of his company, which plays a big role in India’s infrastructure. Regulators are said to have asked Adani for information related to Hindenburg’s claims. But it seems unlikely that Hindenburg’s allegations will be proven or dispelled any time soon.


​​Big changes at Japanese carmakers

PHOTO: REUTERS
Quarterly earnings reports of Japanese carmakers tend to be demure affairs. But on Thursday Toyota and Nissan, Japan’s first and third-largest auto manufacturers, will announce their results amid an air of drama.

Both firms recently announced major internal changes. Toyota replaced its long-time chief executive (and grandson of the firm’s founder), Toyoda Akio, with Sato Koji (pictured), its chief branding officer and head of Lexus, its luxury label. On Monday Nissan announced that it would restructure its alliance with Renault, the French carmaker, so that the firms’ stakes in each other are equalised.

Both moves are intended to help the two companies navigate the shifting roads of the modern car industry. Despite being the world’s top-selling carmaker, Toyota has been a laggard on electric vehicles under Mr Toyoda. Tapping Mr Sato gives the company a chance to reset the narrative. And the marriage between Nissan and Renault had long been unhappy. A looser union could give them the freedom to focus on their respective home markets.

The state of South Africa

PHOTO: REUTERS
Cyril Ramaphosa’s annual state of the nation speeches have tended to follow a pattern. South Africa’s president, in power since replacing Jacob Zuma in 2018, tells parliament that he will fix various problems: power cuts, joblessness, investment-depleting red tape and so on. Then, as a result of his own timidity, his rancorous ruling party (the African National Congress) and a weak bureaucracy, he does little or nothing about them. Blackouts in South Africa were worse last year than any on record; the unemployment rate remains stubbornly high, at 33%.

So when Mr Ramaphosa gives his latest address in Cape Town on Thursday, he will speak to a deeply sceptical nation. He will pledge—again—to overhaul Eskom, the state-owned energy utility. A cabinet reshuffle is in the works. But South Africans are tired of homilies from a president who has tarnished his own reformist credentials. The country is in a hole. To get out, it needs more than words.

Rushdie returns triumphant with new book

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
At the end of Salman Rushdie’s “Victory City”, the author’s 15th novel, a magical storyteller proclaims that while regimes fall, stories survive. “Words are the only victors.” Few writers embody the spirit of that claim as powerfully as Sir Salman. The Bombay-born author of “Midnight’s Children” and “The Satanic Verses” finished his fable a few months before an attacker stabbed him in August 2022, leaving him blind in one eye and without the full use of one hand.

His latest book, published this week, is a historical chronicle of the Vijayanagar empire of southern India that talks about the power of narrative art to prevail over violence and hatred. Its heroine, a poet-queen, conjures a fabulous realm into existence. Fantasy and history converge. Sir Salman, who is still recovering from the attack, will not appear at promotional events. Still, the champion of free-spirited fiction, who withstood both an Iranian fatwa and a violent assault, claims the last, triumphant word.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Please note, the way we choose winners has changed. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which 1953 film musical, starring Ethel Merman, features the song “The Hostess with the Mostess”?

Wednesday: Which female mathematician is generally regarded as the first to write a computer programme?

Fighting for what is right makes life worth living.

Aletta Jacobs
