The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (00:45 GMT+1 / 07:45 Hong Kong)

America’s Supreme Court limited the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency to regulate carbon emissions by power plants, complicating government efforts to mitigate climate change. In a separate case the court held that the Biden administration could reverse a Trump-era policy requiring asylum-seekers to remain in Mexico while their claims are adjudicated. The rulings cap a controversial term in which the court’s conservative majority eliminated the right to abortion, loosened gun laws and eroded the separation between church and state.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan demanded that Sweden extradite 73 people whom Turkey accused of terrorism or risk losing his support to join NATO. Turkey’s president said Sweden promised to deport them, though no such commitment appeared in the countries’ joint memorandum (with Finland) about NATO accession on Tuesday. The ultimatum, issued at the end of the alliance’s summit in Madrid, threatened to re-open a dispute that appeared resolved just days ago.

Consumer spending in America slowed in May for the first time this year as households responded to high inflation and rising interest rates. The drop from a revised 0.6% increase in April to 0.2% growth could suggest that the economy has contracted for the second consecutive quarter. Jerome Powell, head of the Federal Reserve, previously cited “strong” spending as evidence that a recession was not inevitable. Meanwhile, stockmarkets performed worse in the first six months of the year than they have since 1970.

President Joe Biden said he supports scrapping the filibuster, which requires 60 votes to pass legislation in the Senate, in order to codify abortion rights. Mr Biden, a long-time defender of the filibuster, called for a similar exception in January to pass voting-rights legislation. Speaking in Madrid where NATO wrapped up its summit, the president said the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v Wade was “destabilising.”

Russian forces withdrew from Snake Island, a tiny but strategically important chunk of Ukrainian territory in the Black Sea. Russia called the move a “gesture of goodwill” to show that it is not blocking food exports by sea from Ukraine. But Ukraine claims it forced the occupiers into a hasty retreat, having in recent days intensified its efforts to remove them.

China’s president, Xi Jinping, arrived in Hong Kong for events celebrating the 25th anniversary of the territory’s handover from British to Chinese rule. In preparation for the anniversary, on July 1st, many of the city’s streets and buildings have been adorned with red Chinese flags. It is Mr Xi’s first trip outside of mainland China since the pandemic began, and his first visit to Hong Kong since 2017.

Ecuador’s government signed a deal with indigenous leaders to cut fuel prices, ending weeks of sometimes violent protests. The Catholic church moderated the talks. At least eight people died during the demonstrations, hundreds were injured and around 150 were arrested. Bowing to pressure, Ecuador’s president, Guillermo Lasso, also said indigenous groups would be consulted about potential mining projects.

Fact of the day: 15%, the amount by which Ukraine’s economy contracted between April 2021 and April 2022. Read the full article.

Hong Kong is a police state 25 years in the making

PHOTO: REUTERS
Twenty-five years ago Britain returned Hong Kong, which it had ruled for more than 150 years, to China. To mark the anniversary, on Friday, China’s leader, Xi Jinping, is making a rare visit to the territory to swear in John Lee, the new chief executive. The installation of an ex-policeman and security chief as leader of the financial hub illustrates the Chinese Communist Party’s priorities since the city was engulfed by anti-government protests in 2019.

In 1997 the party promised that Hong Kong would remain free and open for at least 50 years. But at the halfway mark Hong Kong is a police state. That didn’t happen overnight. Hours before the anniversary of the handover in 2020 China imposed a draconian security law. But the party had spent decades laying the foundations for its takeover, using infiltration, coercion, fear and intimidation to bring the city to heel. Now, with both overt and covert strategies working in tandem, 25 years from now the territory will be unrecognisable.

Hindu pilgrims trek through Kashmir

PHOTO: AP
This week the first of up to 1m Hindus will embark on the Amarnath Yatra, a 350km pilgrimage to visit an ice stalagmite revered as a symbol of Shiva, a Hindu god. Their calling is as perilous as it is spiritual. A 43-day journey takes them through the mountain passes of Indian-administered Kashmir, some of the most disputed territory in the world.

Around 10,000 soldiers have been posted along the route. They may be needed. In June many Hindus, who are a minority in Kashmir, fled after a string of targeted killings by Muslims. Narendra Modi, India’s Hindu-nationalist prime minister, has lauded “The Kashmir Files”, an inflammatory film about an insurgency. As his Bharatiya Janata Party continues to stoke communal fires, religious tensions are rife elsewhere too. On Tuesday in Rajasthan two Muslim men killed a Hindu over an offensive comment made about Mohammad. Up in the Himalayas, while devotees seek salvation, they should also pray for peace.

Florida becomes a new abortion battleground

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
For years, many women in Alabama and Georgia, where abortion is heavily restricted, have travelled to nearby Florida for the procedure. The Sunshine State has one of America’s highest abortion rates. That may soon change. On Thursday, a judge temporarily blocked a state law banning abortions after 15 weeks, due to take effect on Friday.

The law is similar to the one in Mississippi used last week by the Supreme Court to overturn Roe v Wade. Abortion-rights activists in the state fear that the legal battle over the law, which is expected to continue, will foreshadow more stringent bans. But whether the state’s Republican governor would approve them is unclear. Ron DeSantis has praised the justices for ditching Roe. But most Floridians want abortion to remain legal and he has sidestepped questions about a total ban. Women in Florida and nearby states who need abortions will hope he continues to do so.


Europe ceases bond-buying

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Since the euro zone dipped towards low inflation in the mid-2010s, a scheme to buy government bonds has been the European Central Bank’s principal tool of stimulus. On Friday this long-standing asset-purchase programme will come to an end. The ECB is also set to raise interest rates by 25 basis points in July, and by possibly more in September.

The ECB is trying to avoid a wage-price spiral and bring down inflation, which reached a record 8.1% in May. But being a central banker in a monetary union is hard. Euro-zone countries have different growth prospects and debt levels. Rapid rate increases might send some into recession. And tighter policy will squeeze indebted countries, such as Italy, as governments’ finances come under pressure both from higher underlying rates and the increasing “spread” between their bond yields and those of Germany (the euro zone’s benchmark). The ECB is fashioning a tool which it hopes will constrain spreads. But the gap between the best performers and the worst is likely to widen.

An American sports star in a Russian court

PHOTO: AFP
Like many female American basketball stars, Brittney Griner of Phoenix Mercury spent some of her off-season earning better money playing abroad—in her case in Russia. But when she landed at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo airport on February 17th, customs officials claimed to have found cannabis oil within vape cartridges in her luggage. Ms Griner was arrested and charged with drug-smuggling. Her trial begins on Friday in Moscow.

America’s government decided at first to let the Russian legal process unfold. But in May the State Department reclassified Ms Griner as “wrongly detained”, switching responsibility for her case to the Office of the Special Presidential Envoy for Hostage Affairs. Unfortunately for Ms Griner, Russo-American relations have soured even further since Russia invaded Ukraine, a week after her arrest. Her chances of release appear slim. Acquittal rates in Russia are low and the authorities have the power to overturn the outcome of the trial. Instead, negotiations are likely to intensify.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: What term is used in America for professionally-managed open-ended investment pools that allow small investors to own a wide range of financial securities?
Thursday: Which British newspaper was founded as the Daily Universal Register in 1785?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Talgat Zhumagulov, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan
North America: Katie King, Vancouver, Canada
Central and South America: Sylvia Freund, San Salvador, El Salvador
Europe: Josefina Enfedaque, Brussels, Belgium
Africa: Lasse Herdien, Cape Town, South Africa
Oceania: Tony McNamara, Perth, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Gustavo Petro, Greece, virus and Odessa. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Mars unwrapped

The spiritual home of Mars Inc is Slough, an unprepossessing town somewhere under the flight path to London’s Heathrow Airport. It is not a place that sweet dreams are made of. It serves as the British backdrop for Ricky Gervais’s “The Office”. It is also the place where Forrest Mars, in the Depression of the 1930s, came up with two business ideas and a management philosophy that are still quietly shaping the world today.

The creation story of the Mars Bar is well known. In 1920s Chicago, Forrest Sr, as he is now remembered, met his estranged father, a struggling chocolatier, over a malted milk, and came up with the brainwave of pouring malted milk chocolate as filling into a candy bar. Thus was the Milky Way born. But Forrest Sr, as irascible as he was enterprising, fell out with his father, left America and ended up in Slough. There, he rechristened the Milky Way as the Mars Bar. At a time when people needed calories at low cost, it took off. With brands like m&ms, Mars, based since 1974 in McLean, Virginia, is now the world’s biggest confectioner.

Less familiar is the origin of the dark horse of the Mars empire, pet food. In Slough, Forrest Sr noticed the Brits’ obsession with dogs. He did not like the way they ate scraps off the table. So in 1935 he bought a company that made Chappie, a tinned dog food. Today Mars reckons it caters to half the world’s pets. Royal Canin, maker of a fancy dog chow, is its biggest brand. It is one of the largest providers of veterinary care. On June 22nd the company announced that Poul Weihrauch, head of pet care, would take over from Grant Reid, its retiring ceo. Mr Weihrauch’s elevation partly reflects the growing importance of the pet business, which now generates 58% of sales, overtaking snacks (38%). Food accounts for the rest.

The family-owned company, though fiercely private about its finances, also updated its sales figures. They showed that since Mr Reid took office in 2014, revenues have increased by more than 50%, to $45bn. That makes them bigger than Coca-Cola’s. The firm gives credit for its success to the austere business practices Forrest Sr honed in Slough, now known internally as the Five Principles: quality, responsibility, mutuality, efficiency and freedom. They may sound like managerial guff. But they strike the right balance between making money and doing good. Many more showy corporations aim for that under the trendy slogan of “stakeholder capitalism”. Few carry it off as convincingly as Mars.

To understand why, first consider the relationship between the company and its only shareholders, the family—a dynasty worth about $96bn, according to magazine. The fourth generation, known as g4, runs the board. Like shareholders everywhere, they have varying priorities, ranging from sustainability to the welfare of “associates” (Martian for employees). Yet their mandate for steering the firm puts top-tier financial performance and long-term growth on a par with positive social impact and trust.

The shareholders reap less than a tenth of profits as dividends. That frees Mars to plough the rest back into its business, letting it keep a strong balance-sheet and a staunchly independent streak. They lead low-key lives. That fits with Mars’s egalitarian ethos and preference for privacy. They also retain some of Forrest Sr’s eccentricities. A former board member recalls factory visits with family members where everyone tried mouthfuls of canned dog food in order to check its quality. “It’s like pâté. You get used to it,” he says. The practice continues—though “we don’t come into work every day and chomp away,” a current executive insists.

Next there is the firm itself. It has been professionally run since 2001. People who know Mars say the clan does not meddle much, provided managers do not threaten to blow up the firm’s—and hence the family’s—reputation. Delegation of responsibility runs deep. Mars has a relatively flat management structure, in which bosses have no cushy perks such as personal parking spaces. Associates are given responsibility, even at a young age, to make big decisions. If they take a calculated business risk that goes wrong, so be it. If they behave unethically there is zero tolerance.

In business, the firm is competitive but not cut-throat, rivals say. It used to be notable mostly for a strong factory culture, operational efficiencies and returns measured in relation to its physical assets. But this is changing as the veterinary-services business has grown. Now it plays up the more intangible parts of the business. “If you meet a Mars guy, they will talk about brands and people all the time,” a rival executive says admiringly, noting its high pay and good employee-retention rates.

As for stakeholderism, or what Mars calls mutuality, it says it puts the interests of customers, workers, suppliers, communities and the environment alongside those of the family shareholders. That comes with some big investments, such as $1bn to support sustainable initiatives such as renewable energy, and a policy of paying its taxes in full. But when it talks about these publicly, it is mostly because they are germane to its business. It does not wade into political debates, nor does it pontificate on every social issue.

What about the future? With low debt, lots of cash and products resilient to economic turbulence, Mars is in a strong position to expand further. Some of its competitors, such as Kellogg, a food company, are flogging parts of their business. Mars bought Wrigley, a maker of chewing gum, during the financial crisis in 2008—not its finest acquisition, to be sure, but one it has stuck with. It may snap up more during today’s inflationary turmoil.

Willy Wonka moment
It won’t discuss strategy, however. Though the family is more open about its commitments to society, it keeps business matters tightly under wraps. That legacy, which also dates back to Forrest Sr, may start to change. In 2020 Mars opened the Slough factory to tv cameras for the first time. Its chocolate-makers were, anticlimactically, locals in hairnets, not Oompa Loompas. But at least some of the secrets of Snickers’ nougat filling were revealed. ■

Read more from Schumpeter, our columnist on global business:


Terms of surrender

Looking back, it is easy to think of stockmarket crashes as abrupt shocks. And some of the most dramatic of them were indeed abrupt. At the onset of the covid-19 pandemic, the s&p 500 index of American stocks plummeted by 34% in a little over a month. The last time Russia defaulted on its debt, in 1998, the index took six weeks to travel from zenith to nadir, nearly taking Long-Term Capital Management and the rest of Wall Street with it. Quickest of all was the lightning bolt of October 19th 1987, or “Black Monday”, which wiped 20% off the market in a single day.

The biggest downturns, though, have tended to be much more drawn-out affairs. The bloodbath in equities that accompanied the financial crisis of 2007-09 was no single, vertiginous plunge: it played out over 17 months. Talk of the dotcom bubble “bursting” in the early 2000s can obscure the fact that the journey from peak to trough took two and a half years. The greatest crash of all, beginning in 1929, took nearly three years to run its course.

In each case, losing streaks were interspersed by rallies lasting weeks and fitful days when not much of anything happened. If not quite months of boredom punctuated by moments of terror, they were long, uncertain slogs. Today, six months after America’s equity market started falling in the face of persistent inflation and tighter monetary policy, another slog might lie ahead. But when the bottom finally arrives, what will it look like?

Like a bubble, capitulation—investors’ jargon for the final, frenzied phase of a rout—is accompanied by a kind of mania. It is the part of the crash when something snaps in the collective consciousness and everyone who is going to give up and sell does. Perhaps they are retail investors who kept their nerve after losing a third of their capital but, seeing another 20% of value vanish, conclude that it really might go to zero and rush to the exit. Perhaps they are professionals who know full well it’s a bad time to sell, but can’t get their risk manager (or their clients) off their back. Either way, it is the violence of the shake-out itself that creates the market bottom: those who refuse to sell at the height of the panic are unlikely to lose their cool further down the line. After the frenzy is over, prices start to climb again.

So much for recognising capitulation in hindsight. Spotting it as it happens is harder. Perhaps some clues can be gleaned from how historical crashes have played out. Start with the crudest measures: the length of the crash and the size of the drop from peak to trough. Excluding this year, the s&p 500 has notched up 14 bear markets—falls of more than 20% compared with a recent peak—since the second world war. The average downturn took a little over 11 months and resulted in a decline of more than 32%. Both measures suggest that this year’s losses, which hit 23% in June before rebounding a little, may have some way yet to run.

For a more granular picture, consider the rout in March 2020. One lesson from it is that trading volumes spike as the market plummets. Towards the end of the crash, shares in the s&p 500 were changing hands at more than double their average rate in the weeks running up to it. Volumes for stocks in Britain’s ftse 100 tripled. Another signal is that a large proportion of stocks in an index plunge in value. While the downturn in 2020 was at first led by a handful of stocks, by the last phase pretty much everything was flashing red. True capitulation is reached when contagion spreads not just from one stock to another, but across indices and asset classes.

Set against those measures, this year’s bear market is yet to reach its culmination. Investors are gloomy, but not so much that they have sold their favourite risky assets. Downward lurches have begun to include defensive stocks, but many of those in sectors including pharmaceuticals and telecoms are still up on the year. And the drops do not yet smack of panic: the s&p 500’s worst day this year was its 39th-worst since the turn of the century. Trading volumes, for the most part, suggest a market that is just about holding its nerve.

If capitulation is tricky to pinpoint as it arrives, profiting from it is harder still. How many prices need to be plummeting in lockstep before it becomes time to buy? Trading volumes might have spiked, but have they peaked? Are you sure that you will keep your head when all around you are losing theirs? Studying historical crashes is one thing. Putting their lessons into practice is entirely another.

Read more from Buttonwood, our columnist on financial markets:


A concoction a day

An economic downturn is a bad time to get sick, especially in poor countries. As conventional medicines become scarce and pricey, desperate patients turn to cheaper herbal remedies to treat even serious illnesses like diabetes, cancer and, these days, covid-19. Many doctors, of the scrub-wearing variety, doubt those treatments’ effectiveness. But the business of peddling them is in rude health.

In 2021 sales of Yiling Pharmaceutical, a big maker of traditional Chinese medicines including , used against covid, among various other ailments, exceeded 10bn yuan ($1.6bn), nearly double the figure in pre-pandemic 2019. Amid recent Chinese covid outbreaks in March and April Yiling’s market capitalisation surpassed $11bn. It has since come down but remains three times what it was before the pandemic. Beijing Tongrentang, another large manufacturer, has doubled in value since the start of 2020, also to $11bn. Both companies have outperformed Pfizer and AstraZeneca, two Western producers of indisputably effective covid-19 vaccines (see chart).


They have a powerful champion in President Xi Jinping. His government has praised traditional Chinese medicine’s “positive impact on the progress of human civilisation”. Between 2012 and 2019 alternative treatments’ share of medicine sales in China increased from 31% to 40%. The figure is probably higher today, given their widespread use against covid. As Hong Kong grappled with outbreaks this year, 1m packets of were sent to the territory from the mainland.

Since 2020 China has also promoted the supposed benefits of in places struggling to procure covid jabs and treatments. Nearly 30 countries have approved the formulation for import, and some, including Kuwait and Laos, to treat covid. Belarus has signed an agreement with China to build a factory to churn out traditional Chinese medicine in Minsk.

Regulators in America and Singapore have warned against using to treat covid. That has not put off investors. As earnings go, makers of traditional medicines have a big advantage: their reliance on ancient wisdom saves them billions in research-and-development costs. Pfizer and AstraZeneca funnel a fifth of their revenues, give or take, into r&d, according to Bloomberg. For Yiling and Beijing Tongrentang the figures are, respectively, 7.8% and 1.2%. ■


The trials on the road to world harmony are no greater than the courage of those who accept the challenge.

Carl Lewis
