The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 2 hours ago (23:05 GMT+1 / 06:05 Hong Kong)

America’s president, Joe Biden, announced nearly $3bn of military assistance to Ukraine on its independence day, which coincides with the six-month anniversary of Russia’s invasion. The muted celebrations were marred by a Russian rocket strike on a railway station that killed at least 22 people and injured dozens more. Earlier, Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, had warned of “hideous Russian provocations” ahead of the national holiday.

Mr Biden also announced significant student debt relief. The plan will see up to $10,000 of student loan debt cancelled for those who earn less than $125,000 a year, and even greater help for those who received federal student aid during their education. The announcement follows months of political wrangling; Senate Republicans accused Mr Biden of “passing the buck to working-class Americans”.

Japan’s prime minister, Kishida Fumio, said on Wednesday that his country will consider building a new generation of nuclear-power reactors as it prepares to restart plants left idle since the Fukushima disaster of 2011. The global surge in energy prices helped prompt an about-face. There remains work to be done, Mr Kishida implied, in convincing the public that this counts towards Japan’s “green transformation”.

California is expected to ban the sale of petrol cars, in a move that could accelerate the transition to electric vehicles. The California Air Resources Board said that 100% of cars sold in the state, America’s largest car market, will have to be zero-emissions by 2035, up from 12% today. Last week President Joe Biden signed a new climate law that earmarks $370bn for green energy projects.

Thailand’s Constitutional Court suspended the prime minister, Prayuth Chan-ocha, in response to a petition filed by the main opposition party. Move Forward argues that Mr Prayuth, who seized power in a coup in 2014, should step down this month in line with the constitution’s eight-year term limit. The deputy prime minister, Prawit Wongsuwan, is expected to take over as interim leader; a general election is due by May 2023.

An EU agency warned on Tuesday that Europe faces its worst drought in 500 years. The European Drought Observatory said that 47% of the union’s landmass is subject to the warning, with vegetation affected in 17%. Riverine shipping, hydropower and agriculture are all under strain. Concomitant droughts in America, Britain and China mean that international markets offer little relief.

Fighting erupted in northern Ethiopia between rebels from the Tigray region and central government forces, ending a five-month long ceasefire and dampening hopes for peace talks in the country’s ongoing civil war. The conflict between the Tigray People’s Liberation Front, which controls the region, and prime minister Abiy Ahmed’s government has killed thousands and displaced millions since it began in 2020.

Fact of the day: $15bn, the value of direct investment foreigners pulled out of Russia in the first quarter of 2022, easily the worst figure on record. Read the full story.

Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago headache

PHOTO: REUTERS
Donald Trump decried the FBI raid on his Mar-a-Lago home on August 8th as an unjustified political assault. The bureau has so far been tight-lipped on its motivations. But its rationale for the seizure of classified records from Mr Trump’s Palm Beach estate may soon be divulged. A judge in Florida, Bruce Reinhart, could rule as soon as Thursday on whether to unseal a redacted version of the Justice Department’s affidavit that enabled the search.

Mr Trump has demanded the unsealing of the full document. But his lawyers filed no such motion in court. Government officials warn that releasing the unredacted affidavit could sabotage their probe into the former president’s handling of government records. Last week Mr Reinhart gave the Justice Department seven days to redact it to their liking, signalling that at least part of the document might see the light of day. But negotiations between the court and the government about exactly what to publish could yet postpone the unveiling.

Misery by design in Myanmar

PHOTO: REUTERS
Five years ago the Burmese army forced nearly 750,000 Rohingyas to leave Myanmar amid intense violence. The UN branded the army’s campaign of mass killing, rape and arson a genocide, but no punishments followed. Most of the expelled Rohingyas are now languishing in Bangladesh in the world’s biggest refugee camp. On Thursday human rights groups will mark “Rohingya Remembrance Day”.

But around 600,000 remain in Myanmar. Many are confined to what Fortify Rights, an American pressure group based in South-East Asia, calls “modern concentration camps”. Conditions are squalid, structures unsound and access to health care scant. Their plight has become ever more dire since the army toppled the government of Aung San Suu Kyi, the de facto leader, last year. They are denied access to education and paid work. The military junta has blocked international-aid agencies from visiting Rohingya camps and villages. No matter which side of the border Rohingyas find themselves on, their experience is comparable: hunger and misery surrounded by barbed wire.

Australia prepares to try an alleged Chinese agent

PHOTO: PA IMAGES
In 2018 Australia infuriated China by rushing through sweeping laws to prevent foreign meddling in its democracy. On Thursday, the only man so far to be accused of breaching them appears before a court in Victoria. In 2020 Di Sanh Duong, a 67-year-old Australian of Chinese heritage, made a A$37,000 ($25,500) donation to a hospital in Melbourne. Prosecutors allege that he was seeking to gain favour with Alan Tudge, an up-and-coming federal minister who he invited for the handing over of the cheque, on behalf of the Chinese Communist Party. Mr Duong’s lawyer says the donation was a bid to improve the public image of Chinese people in Australia.

On trial is not only Mr Duong but the new laws themselves. Mr Duong is accused of “preparing for” or “planning” interference. The prosecution has used evidence of his links to the Chinese government to build its case. But criminalising contacts and intent, rather than action, is a troubling idea for many lawyers.

Moving markets in Wyoming

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
In the shadow of the majestic Teton mountain range, just over 100 central bankers and economists from around the world are gathering at a lodge in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. Their idyllic retreat, which starts on Thursday, is not all late-summer’s calm: the comments of attendees can shake global markets. The main event at the three-day economic symposium will be a speech by Jerome Powell, chairman of the Federal Reserve, on Friday.

After softer inflation data in America last month, many investors thought the Fed might relax its hawkish stance. They piled back into stocks, fuelling a month-long rally. Mr Powell has a chance to recalibrate expectations with his speech. He may choose to signal that the Fed’s campaign to crush inflation is far from over. That possibility has already rattled markets, with leading indices taking a tumble this week. The descent from high inflation looks a little like the jagged path down the Teton peaks.


France seeks to befriend Algeria

PHOTO: AFP
Sixty years ago Algeria won independence from France after a bloody eight-year war. This painful history renders the link between the two countries complicated even today. So a three-day visit of Emmanuel Macron to the north African country, which begins on Thursday, has been optimistically billed as one of “friendship”. France’s president hopes to use his first foray to Algeria in five years to forge closer links between businesses, startups and artists.

But first Mr Macron hopes to “soothe memories”, after decades marked by mutual suspicion and accusations. Relations soured last year when Mr Macron reportedly questioned Algeria’s pre-colonial existence as a nation. But he has taken steps to acknowledge France’s role in certain historical atrocities, and set up a “memories and truth” commission on his country’s historical role in Algeria. Now there are new questions, including how to source more natural gas from resource-rich Algeria, and how to ease recently tightened rules for Algerians to obtain French visas.

Daily quiz

Quiz: Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which 1877 novel by Anna Sewell is considered a classic of children’s literature?

Wednesday: Who was the British foreign secretary during the invasion of Iraq in 2003?

No matter what accomplishments you make, somebody helped you.

Althea Gibson
