The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (22:12 GMT / 06:12 Hong Kong)

Ukrainian troops entered the city of Kherson as Russian forces retreated from it. Ukrainian flags were raised in the regional capital. Earlier, Russia’s defence ministry said it had completed a full withdrawal of troops from the western bank of the Dnieper river in Ukraine’s Kherson province. The Antonivskiy bridge, connecting Kherson city to the new Russian defensive line, collapsed.

FTX, until recently one of the world’s largest crypto exchanges, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy after suffering a liquidity crunch. Sam Bankman-Fried, its founder, resigned as chief executive. Earlier in the week Binance, a bigger exchange, withdrew from talks to buy out FTX, which had failed to meet withdrawal requests of up to $8bn. Crypto prices crashed.

SoftBank Group reported its first quarterly profit—of ¥3trn ($21bn)—after three loss-making quarters, thanks to a selldown of its stake in Alibaba, a Chinese e-commerce firm. But SoftBank’s giant Vision Funds wrote down by ¥1.4tn the value of their tech investments. Son Masayoshi said he would step away from day-to-day management of the Japanese telecoms-and-software firm to focus on Arm, the British chipmaker it acquired in 2016.

President Joe Biden told attendees of COP27 in Egypt that climate change threatens “the very life of the planet” and promised that America was on track to cut its greenhouse-gas emissions by at least 50% from 2005 levels by 2030. Reactions to Mr Biden’s speech were mixed. Germany’s climate envoy praised his “positive signals”. Other observers criticised his administration’s lack of international climate-finance commitments.

Twitter stopped allowing users to “verify” their account for $7.99 per month after a large number impersonated brands and celebrities. The new feature—Elon Musk’s first innovation since taking over the social-media network—was launched on Wednesday and disabled a day later, according to the Washington Post. Mr Musk has said he wants half of Twitter’s revenue to come from paying subscribers rather than advertisers.

Britain’s foreign ministry summoned the Iranian chargé d’affaires over reports that two British-Iranian journalists in London had received threats from the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps. Iran International, a Farsi-language news outlet based in Britain, said the police had warned two of its reporters that they faced “imminent, credible and significant risk to their lives” for reporting on Iran’s protests.

Turkish prosecutors demanded that Istanbul’s mayor be jailed for at least 15 months for describing as “idiots” election officials allied with President Recep Tayyip Erdogan. They had stripped him of an election victory in 2019. Ekrem Imamoglu, who comfortably won a later election, was put on trial for “insulting” public officials. If convicted, Mr Imamoglu will be banned from holding office during his sentence.

Word of the week: Acquis communautaire, the body of all EU laws, treaties and standards that candidate countries must adopt upon accession to the bloc. Consider the term part of Eurospeak.

So long, Kherson

PHOTO: AP
After months of moving at a glacial pace, the front lines of the war in Ukraine are now shifting at breakneck speed. Ukrainian forces are rushing forward to fill the apparent vacuum left by Russia’s army on the west bank of the Dnieper river. Russia had announced on Wednesday that it would retreat from the area to save its forces from destruction.

On Friday Ukrainian troops arrived in the centre of Kherson, liberating it after eight months of occupation. They were greeted by cheering locals. The area is thought to have been heavily mined and booby-trapped, so it may be a while before it is fully in Ukraine’s hands. Even so, the seeming speed of Russia’s retreat has taken observers by surprise: some expected it would take days, if not weeks. The Kremlin is trying to insist that the move is a temporary farewell rather than a permanent goodbye. Ukraine’s next target may be Zaporizhia province to the east—part of Russia’s land bridge to Crimea.

A South-East Asian club struggles for relevance

PHOTO: DPA
The ten-country Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) is meeting in Phnom Penh, Cambodia’s capital, until Sunday. This is its first in-person summit since the pandemic. This year’s theme is “Addressing Challenges Together”. The idea is laudable but other-worldly: ASEAN’s challenges are mostly insurmountable. The club has proved incapable of influencing the ruthless junta in Myanmar, an ASEAN member. Nor does it seem able to do much about the growing rivalry in the region between America and China.

Still, it counts as a small ASEAN win that President Joe Biden will attend its key forum, the East Asia Summit, on Saturday, before heading to Bali in Indonesia for the G20 (and a meeting with Xi Jinping, his Chinese counterpart). America will be made a “comprehensive strategic partner” of ASEAN, a distinction granted to China a year ago. This will help ASEAN maintain its mantra of “centrality”, staying at least somewhat relevant to the superpowers duking it out.

A new generation for men’s tennis

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
​​Tennis aficionados have been awaiting a generational change for years, only to find that young players are unable to dislodge the veteran trio of Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic. But the baton may well pass this year. Mr Federer retired in September. Mr Nadal and Mr Djokovic this year won their now customary French Open and Wimbledon titles, but the challengers are coming.

There is already a new world number one, Carlos Alcaraz, a 19-year-old Spaniard who was majestic in winning the US Open in September. Twelve months ago Mr Alcaraz won the ATP’s Next Generation event, a short tournament open to the highest-ranked players aged 21 and under. The final of the 2022 event takes place on Saturday. Mr Alcaraz and fellow rising stars Holger Rune and Jannik Sinner are taking a breather, but finalists Brandom Nakashima and Jiri Lehecka look solid bets to become future top-ten players.

The polka-dot princess in Hong Kong

PHOTO: REUTERS
M+, a contemporary-art museum in Hong Kong, celebrates its first anniversary with a huge retrospective opening on Saturday. “Yayoi Kusama: 1945 to Now” features more than 200 works by the Japanese sculptor and installation artist drawn from museums and private collections in America, Asia and Europe. It explores questions of life and death, and considers how Ms Kusama, now 93, became a cultural icon to fans a quarter her age.

With her pieces regularly fetching more than $1m at auction, “the princess of polka dots” is Japan’s most successful living artist. She created mirrored “Infinity Rooms”, which draw huge crowds wherever they appear. Famous for her spotted paintings, strawberry-red bob and, as of late, a polka-dot wheelchair, she checked into a psychiatric institution in Tokyo in 1977 and has lived there ever since. With her quirkiness and mass appeal, Ms Kusama, says the chief curator of M+, “is the ultimate outsider and the ultimate insider”.

Weekend profile: Alaa Abd el-Fattah, Egypt’s prisoner of conscience

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
In 2011 Alaa Abd el-Fattah turned 30 in a Cairo jail. He spent his 40th birthday behind bars, too. In fact, the human-rights activist has marked many of life’s milestones from inside a cell: his son’s birth, his father’s death. Again in custody, he is Egypt’s most high-profile political prisoner—and a source of international embarrassment to its thuggish government.

Egypt had hoped to use COP27, the UN climate conference taking place in Sharm el-Sheikh, to polish its image. But Mr Abd el-Fattah, who recently escalated a months-long hunger strike by refusing water, is making that impossible. America’s president, Joe Biden, raised Mr Abd el-Fattah’s case with his Egyptian counterpart on Friday. Many other leaders and luminaries have called for his release.

Mr Abd el-Fattah was born to Egyptian intellectuals with an activist bent. Imprisonment prevented his father from attending the birth of his daughter, the beginning of a dark family tradition. Mr Abd el-Fattah’s first taste of protest came in 2005, when Egyptians decried election-rigging by the government of Hosni Mubarak, the dictator who ruled from 1981 to 2011. By 2011, when the Arab spring swept the Middle East, Mr Abd el-Fattah had become a leader of Egypt’s uprising. After General Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi helped topple a democratically elected government in 2013 he was arrested again, for allegedly organising against a new law banning protests. He has since spent most of his time in prison.

Mr Abd el-Fattah’s confrontation with the Egyptian regime may now be reaching a climax. In December he received a five-year prison sentence for “undermining national security”. He has been on hunger strike for more than 200 days and has refused water since last weekend. On Thursday his sister said authorities had started a “medical intervention”. The government is happy to let him die, she insisted, but not “while the world is watching”. All the more reason to pay attention.

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown the winners in next week’s edition.

November 12th edition

Factual clues

1 down Perhaps the most chuffed politician in America (3,8)

1 across What’s happening to Meta’s system (6)

2 across A buttery, nutty brittle (5)

3 across A Pakistani more biddable than Imran Khan? (6)

Cryptic clues

1 down Republican star? No: snide twister (3,8)

1 across Fire once more to start again? (6)

2 across Persian sweet is very Chinese (5)

3 across Afresh, I mingled without ecstasy, but met prime minister (6)


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Kobchai Kingchatchaval, Bangkok, Thailand

North America: Bob Bedier, Vancouver, Canada

Central and South America: Ramon Azpurua, Caracas, Venezuela

Europe: Eleanor Smith, Cambridge, Britain

Africa: Madeleine Wackernagel, Naro Moru, Kenya

Oceania: Kieran Donoghue, Melbourne, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of David Bowie, Harper Lee, Muhammad Ali (he was Cassius Clay in 1960), Prince and Zsa Zsa Gabor. The theme is that they all died in 2016, a year that was famously deadly for celebrities

Luck’s a revolving door, you just need to know when it’s your time to walk through.

Stan Lee
