The world in brief
September 9, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Joe Biden, America’s president, and Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, met privately after a welcome ceremony for world leaders attending the G20 summit in Delhi, India’s capital. The White House described the session as one of “warmth and confidence”. Neither Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, nor Xi Jinping, his Chinese counterpart, is at the summit, where Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is expected to be a notable sticking-point among attendees.

The world is not on track to meet its climate goals, the UN warned in its first stock-take since the Paris agreement of 2015. Countries had agreed to limit warming to 1.5°C, but the UN said that reaching that target would require an additional 20 gigatonnes’ worth of carbon reductions this decade. World leaders will meet at COP28 in November to assess their progress.

Almost 300 people died after an earthquake struck Morocco, according to the country’s Interior Ministry. The epicentre of the tremor, which registered a magnitude of 6.8, was about 70km to the south-west of Marrakesh, the capital. Hospitals are reported to be treating large numbers of injured people.

Global rice prices rose by 9.8% in August compared with the previous month, hitting a 15-year high. India, which accounts for about 40% of the world’s rice shipments, banned the export of non-basmati white rice in July after heavy rains wiped out many paddy fields; prices have soared since then. Still, overall food prices fell by 2.1% in August.

Nancy Pelosi, a Democratic congresswoman for California, announced she would run for re-election in 2024. The 83-year-old was the first woman to be elected speaker of the House of Representatives and held the role longer than any other Democrat. She stepped down from the party’s leadership after Republicans re-captured control of the chamber in November’s midterms.

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said his country was “ready if it is necessary” to hold elections, but acknowledged that a free and fair poll would be difficult in wartime. Russia, meanwhile, began sham local elections in parts of four Ukrainian oblasts it illegally annexed last year—but it does not even fully control any of the provinces it claims.

A Spanish prosecutor filed a complaint against Luis Rubiales, the suspended head of the country’s football federation, with the high court. Mr Rubiales is accused of sexual assault and coercion after he kissed Jenni Hermoso, a football player, after her team’s victory in the World Cup final on August 20th. The court will decide whether to present formal charges against Mr Rubiales.

Word of the week: blusukan, a Javanese word for impromptu neighbourhood visits. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
India hosts the G20
World leaders convene on Saturday for the main meeting of this year’s G20 summit in Delhi, which has been turned into a fountain-studded fortress for the occasion. Vladimir Putin of Russia and Xi Jinping of China will be conspicuously missing. Their absence highlights divisions among the group, whose members account for 85% of the world’s GDP. Russia’s war against Ukraine is the main sticking point, but they have failed to find consensus on a host of issues.

India has styled itself as the “voice of the global South” in a bid to represent the interests of the poor world. It has recently tried to forge an agreement on how to pay for climate-change adaptation. That ticklish initiative is unlikely to succeed. Yet a failure to bring the world together need not trouble the summit’s host, India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi. His cult of personality has only been bolstered by the G20 paraphernalia, adorned with his face, decking out India’s cities.


PHOTO: AP
North Korea rings in 75
Early Saturday morning North Korea marked the 75th anniversary of its founding with a parade. In addition to a display of the country’s reservists, this year’s celebrations look set to include an altogether rarer site: a Russian military orchestra giving a concert.

The performance is yet another sign that the two countries are growing closer. In July Sergei Shoigu, Russia’s defence minister, attended a similar parade and was treated to a tour of a North Korean arms expo by Kim Jong Un, the country’s dictator. America claims Mr Shoigu was trying to buy North Korean wares for Russia’s war in Ukraine. Earlier this week the White House said that Mr Kim might go to Russia this month to meet his counterpart, Vladimir Putin, to discuss such a deal. That too would largely be for show; North Korean munitions, mostly old and poorly maintained, would have a marginal impact. But it would send a message to South Korea that increasing aid to Ukraine would have consequences.


PHOTO: NETFLIX
The Invictus Games begin
On Saturday 550 wounded servicemen and women from 21 countries will gather in Dusseldorf in Germany to compete in the sixth edition of the Invictus Games. The Paralympic-style event is the brainchild of Britain’s Prince Harry, who established it in 2014 to “demonstrate the power of sport to inspire recovery”.

This year’s event has been given a bigger spotlight by “Heart of Invictus”. The series, released last week on Netflix, features inspiring stories about soldier-athletes. At the centre of the documentary is Yuliia Paievska, a disabled former medic and member of the Ukrainian team. In February 2022 she was drawn back into conflict when Russia invaded her homeland. Soon after, she was captured by Russian forces. Since her release in June 2022, she has returned to training in archery and swimming. Over the next ten days, she will be part of Ukraine’s team in Dusseldorf and a symbol of the games’ ethos.


PHOTO: YANNIS DRAKOULIDIS / FOCUS FEATU
A franchise heads to Greece
In Hollywood, some films—“Barbie”, for instance—are sure to be a hit. Others are not such an easy sell. When Rita Wilson and Tom Hanks were touting the idea of turning the original stage-show of “My Big Fat Greek Wedding” into a film, big studios and independent companies alike were unsure what to make of it. They feared its subject would be too niche.

Viewers, however, loved the story of the rambunctious Portokalos family putting a new American interloper through his paces. It made more than $360m at the global box office and was one of the highest grossing films of 2002.

A sequel followed in 2016 and, despite that film’s poor reviews, a third instalment now follows. In the new movie, which hit American cinemas this week, the clan travels to Greece to track down its late patriarch’s friends. The film-makers hope to tell a universal story once again: this time of connecting with a lost loved one by retracing their steps.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
Weekend profile: Rustem Umerov, Ukraine’s new defence minister
Starting a job can be hard. Just ask Rustem Umerov, Ukraine’s new defence minister, who joins an institution reeling from two corruption scandals. The allegations—which centred on Ukraine’s armed forces paying inflated prices for eggs and winter coats—led President Volodymyr Zelensky to dismiss the previous minister, Oleksii Reznikov, on September 3rd.

Mr Zelensky suggested that his new minister required no “additional introductions”. But for the uninitiated, Mr Umerov is a businessman, parliamentarian and prominent Crimean Tatar, a Muslim ethnic group native to Crimea, the peninsula that Russia annexed in 2014. Born in Uzbekistan, where Josef Stalin deported around 200,000 Crimean Tatars in the 1940s, Mr Umerov could only come back to his ancestral homeland after the Soviets began allowing their return in the late 1980s. He later spent a year at an American high school, sponsored by the State Department, and received degrees in economics and finance from a university in Kyiv.

Before going into politics, Mr Umerov worked in the telecoms industry and at his own investment fund. He was elected to Ukraine’s parliament in 2019 for Holos, a pro-European opposition party, and became co-chairman of Crimea Platform, which tries to persuade friendly governments to lean on Russia to end its occupation of the peninsula.

Since the invasion, the MP has taken part in several negotiations with Russia, including over a deal to allow Ukraine to export grain via the Black Sea. (Russia withdrew from the agreement in July.) The experience should serve him well as defence minister, a role that involves complex talks with international partners over military aid. Mr Umerov, who will be Ukraine’s first Muslim minister, speaks five languages: English, Russian, Tatar, Turkish and Ukrainian.

His appointment is meant to signal that Mr Zelensky takes corruption seriously. In September 2022 Mr Umerov became head of the state property fund, which oversees the privatisation of public assets, a policy area with a reputation for unscrupulousness. His efforts to clean up the agency proved profitable for the fund—and earned the respect of anti-graft activists. He will hope to repeat the trick.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist. Email all four answers by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Globe-spanning project to restructure an old debt with a tzar, at last (4, 3, 4)

1 across Bend a little truth in financial statement (6)

2 across It’s audible in piano I select (5)

3 across Basketball league breaking ground around contested area (6)

Factual clues

1 down An initiative that turned ten this week (4, 3, 4)

1 across What the EU is considering increasing in order to support Ukraine (6)

2 across An unexpected factor in how well plants grow (5)

3 across A region seized by Russia almost a decade ago (6)



The winners of last week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Marcela Dutra, Montevideo, Uruguay

Corien Kershey, Ottawa, Canada

Alejandro Jara, Santiago, Chile


They all gave the correct answers of Robert Lucas jr, Marianne, “Let’s go Brandon”, Phil Collins and Emma Watson. The theme is characters from Jane Austen novels: Charlotte Lucas (from Pride and Prejudice), Marianne Dashwood (from Sense and Sensibility), Colonel Brandon (from Sense and Sensibility), William Collins (from Pride and Prejudice) and Emma Woodhouse (from Emma).

The questions were:

Monday: Which economist, who died earlier this year, won the Nobel prize for developing the hypothesis of rational expectations?

Tuesday: Which woman is the national personification of the French republic?

Wednesday: What three word phrase is often used by conservatives as an insult to President Joe Biden?

Thursday: Which drummer from the rock band Genesis went on to have a successful solo singing career?

Friday: Which actor played Hermione in the Harry Potter movies?

Earth is the cradle of humanity, but one cannot live in a cradle forever.

Konstantin Tsiolkovsky
