The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (04:23 GMT+1 / 11:23 Hong Kong)

The Novofedorivka military airbase in Russia-controlled Crimea was hit by a series of powerful explosions. Russia’s defence ministry said that ammunition was detonated, but not whether partisans lit the fuse, as was suggested by a Ukrainian official. Crimea, a peninsula of land in southern Ukraine, was annexed by Russia in 2014. The site of the explosions is 200 kilometres away from the frontline of the war.

Leading Republicans denounced the FBI raid on Donald Trump’s Florida home. Kevin McCarthy, the most senior Republican in the House of Representatives, vowed to investigate the justice department should his party take control of the chamber after mid-term elections. Republicans used anger at the operation to fuel a funding drive. Meanwhile, Mr Trump was dealt another blow when a federal judge ruled that the House could request his tax returns.

Taiwan’s foreign minister warned that China was using military drills around the island “to prepare for the invasion of Taiwan”. Speaking at a press conference on Tuesday Joseph Wu said that regular exercises could be used as an “attempt to wreck the long-term status quo”, but that Taiwan would not be intimidated. On Tuesday Taiwan conducted its own defensive drills.

Coinbase, the largest cryptocurrency exchange based in America, posted a $1.1bn loss for the second quarter. At the same point last year, during the sector’s boom times, Coinbase reported a net profit of $1.6bn. The firm’s slide offers yet more evidence of crypto’s recent implosion. Its share price tanked.

President Joe Biden signed documents acknowledging America’s desire to expand NATO by admitting Finland and Sweden. The two Nordic countries need members’ unanimous support in order to join the military alliance. NATO has 30 members, and more than 20 have already signed on to the expansion. Finland and Sweden applied for membership after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

AppLovin, which makes software for advertising on mobile apps, offered to buy Unity, another software-maker which mainly makes tools for designing games, for $17.5bn. Unity’s stock, which has plunged in recent months, jumped on the news; AppLovin’s stock, meanwhile, fell by more than 10%.

Serena Williams, one of the most successful tennis players of all time, said she will retire, probably after the US Open finishes in September. Ms Williams plans to concentrate on her family and her venture-capital firm. The 40-year-old player has won 23 grand slam championships.

Fact of the day: $10bn, the amount of venture capital funding for American aerospace and defence startups in 2021, triple 2019’s figure. Read the full article.

Inflation down but not out in America

PHOTO: AFP
After months of soaring inflation, America may get a partial reprieve. In data for July, due out on Wednesday, consumer prices are expected to have risen by about 8.7% year-on-year, down from a four-decade high of 9.1% in June. That is likely to prompt discussion of whether America has finally passed peak inflation.

The details of the data may be more sobering. A fall in oil prices—down more than 10% in July from June—will probably account for much of the headline decline in inflation. Take out volatile food and energy costs, and inflation probably accelerated. Moreover, nominal wages are also still rising strongly, generating yet more upward pressure on prices. Markets had hoped the Federal Reserve might be able to slow the pace of its interest-rate increases. But with inflation like this, it may not want to let up.

Republicans rally around Trump

PHOTO: EPA
The raid may have been shocking; the response was not. On Monday, the FBI searched Donald Trump’s Florida estate, reportedly part of an inquiry into whether the former president had mishandled classified material after leaving office. The raid could suggest that evidence of a federal crime lurked in Mr Trump’s estate. Merrick Garland, the attorney-general, is not one for taking bold steps based on whims.

This is only one of many legal threats Mr Trump faces. Yet it may help unite Republicans around him. After the raid Republican congressmen vowed to investigate the investigators, should the party win a majority in the House of Representatives at the mid-terms in November. Mr Trump called the raid a “weaponisation” of the justice system, intended to to derail another potential presidential bid. His enduring political influence is already visible in Republican primaries across the country. According to Politico, a news website, insiders think the raid will, if anything, accelerate Mr Trump’s decision to run again in 2024.

Europe bans Russian coal

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The European Union’s ban on imports of Russian coal, agreed in April as part of its fifth package of sanctions, takes effect on Wednesday. One of the world’s biggest exporters of the black stuff, Russia supplied around 70% of the EU’s imports of thermal coal (used to generate electricity) and 45% of all coal imports last year, according to Bruegel, a think-tank in Brussels.

Yet coal matters less to the Kremlin than gas or oil. Of the €94.3bn ($96.5bn) that the EU spent on Russian fuel last year, just €5.3bn ($5.4bn) went on coal. Ukraine’s government would like the EU to go much faster restricting other fuel sources. But a planned embargo on oil will come fully into force only next year. And the EU has so far imposed no restrictions on Russian natural gas at all, other than asking its members to use less of it. Instead, Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, is cutting gas exports to try to blackmail Europe into relaxing sanctions.


A cruel summer for TUI?

PHOTO: ALAMY
While much of Europe basks on summer holiday, TUI—the travel giant that will have organised many of those trips—will on Wednesday report results for the second quarter of 2022. They are expected to show a strong surge in revenue and bookings, fuelled by pent-up demand after two pandemic-stricken years.

But that does not mean bosses at TUI’s headquarters, in Hanover, can relax. The German firm, which owns 1,600 travel agencies and five airlines, has not yet recovered from the ravages inflicted on the travel sector by the pandemic. It has struggled with irate customers upset by this summer’s travel chaos, as thousands of flights were delayed or cancelled. And looming recessions in Germany and Britain would hit the group hard. Further turbulence could come from the departure of Fritz Joussen, the group’s chief executive, who announced his resignation in June after a successful ten-year stint. His successor will take over a ship that is yet to be steadied.

The Chess Olympiad concludes

PHOTO: EPA
In Mahabalipuram, a sleepy Indian town some 40km from Chennai, over 2,000 players from 187 countries have been battling in the Chess Olympiad, the game’s top international team event. As the teams depart on Wednesday, Uzbek and Ukrainian players will be particularly happy: they won the men’s and women’s categories respectively.

As rooks and knights jousted on the chessboard, there was action away from it, too. On August 7th Arkady Dvorkovich, a former Russian deputy prime minister, was re-elected as the president of the International Chess Federation, which organises the Olympiad, winning a landslide victory over Andrii Baryshpolets, a Ukrainian grandmaster. Mr Dvorkovich’s re-election is controversial. Though he initially decried Russia’s invasion of Ukraine—an action described as a “​​national betrayal” by a Russian MP—he later released a statement praising his country’s soldiers. Russia now calls him “our candidate”.

For all that, despite Mr Dvorkovich’s position, his countrymen are still banned from the federation’s competitions. Soft power only goes so far.

I want to know how the world works, and I hope that I maybe one day can learn enough to make a difference.

Kim Wall
