The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (09:10 GMT+1 London)

President Joe Biden promised that the federal government would protect women travelling for abortions, whom he predicted some states would try to arrest. In June the Supreme Court overturned the constitutional right to abortion enshrined in Roe v Wade. Since then seven states have outlawed abortions—though federal judges in Kentucky, Louisiana and Utah have temporarily blocked the bans—and others are attempting to do the same.

Legislators in New York passed a law banning guns in many public places in the state, including on public transport and in parks and hospitals. Those applying for a gun licence must also undergo several hours of training. The law is an attempt to mitigate a recent decision by America’s Supreme Court to strike down a New York law restricting who can carry a concealed firearm.

Large explosions were reported on Saturday morning in Mykolaiv, a city in southern Ukraine that has been under Russian fire for several days. Earlier, authorities said that the death toll from a Russian missile strike on an apartment building near Odessa, an important port city, had risen to at least 21 people. Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, described the attack as “conscious, deliberately targeted Russian terror”.

Inflation in the euro zone hit a record 8.6% in June with energy prices increasing at an annual rate of 41.9%, according to estimates released on Friday. Food, alcohol and tobacco prices increased by 8.9%. The figures will put pressure on the European Central Bank to raise interest rates faster to stem inflation.

Protestors stormed Libya’s parliament building in Tobruk, a city in the east of the country, and rallies were held in several other cities including Tripoli, the capital. People are demonstrating against political deadlock and worsening living conditions, including power cuts and rapidly rising prices. The unrest came one day after UN-backed talks in Geneva failed to establish a path towards elections.

Three Chinese state airlines pledged to buy nearly 300 Airbus jets, their largest order since before the pandemic. Together the aeroplanes have a list price of $37bn, though airlines normally get discounts. The deal is a blow to Boeing, which has not sold to a Chinese commercial carrier since 2017 and whose 737 MAX jets are still grounded in China.

The World Health Organisation called for “urgent” action to limit the spread of monkeypox in Europe, where cases have tripled in the past two weeks. Some 4,500 laboratory-confirmed infections—90% of the worldwide total—have been reported there. Nearly a tenth of patients have been hospitalised; none has died. Almost all who reported demographic data are homosexual and bisexual men aged 21-40.

Word of the week: malos pasos, “wrong path” in Spanish. At least 100,000 people are missing in Mexico. Victims are often dismissed as having taken the wrong path, and their disappearances ignored by officials. Read more.

Readers of World in Brief may have noticed its absence from the app and website on Friday evening and Saturday morning. This was because of a technical problem that has now been resolved. Sorry.

Pressure piles on Ukraine

PHOTO: EYEVINE
Ukraine may have celebrated the liberation of the strategic Snake Island, but threats are multiplying elsewhere. Early on Friday Russian air strikes killed 21 people near the southern port city of Odessa. In the north, concerns that Belarus will take a more formal part in the war have prompted Ukraine to fortify its borders. Alexander Lukashenko, the Belarusian dictator, gave Russia free use of his territory, weapons and military facilities in February but avoided sending his poorly equipped troops to Ukraine. That would be unpopular at home. Yet Russia is dialling up the pressure.

Oleksiy Danilov, Ukraine’s head of national security, confirmed that “readiness checks” had been carried out on forces in northern border regions on Thursday and said seven Belarusian battalions had mobilised close to Ukraine. A highly placed Ukrainian intelligence source says any new incursion would be met with a decisive show of force. But he suggests the main aim of the movements is to distract Ukraine from fighting in the east. “Putin is piling the pressure on,” says the official.

India’s shrinking space for dissent

PHOTO: AFP
Along with other leaders at the G7 summit on June 27th, Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, promised to protect the “freedom, independence and diversity” of civil society. Yet that same day, police in Delhi arrested Mohammed Zubair, the co-founder of a fact-checking website, over a tweet deemed to have hurt religious feelings. Days earlier Teesta Setalvad, a human-rights activist, was arrested on charges of fabricating evidence and committing a criminal conspiracy. She has spent years trying to prove that senior officials in the state of Gujarat, and above all Mr Modi himself, stoked deadly sectarian riots in 2002.

On Saturday Ms Setalvad will appear in court to learn if she will remain in police custody. She can expect little relief. India’s courts are ever more deferential to the government. On June 24th the Supreme Court upheld a ruling that cleared Mr Modi of complicity in the 2002 riots—and appeared to suggest that Ms Setalvad should be prosecuted for her efforts to challenge the government.

China’s past, Hong Kong’s future

PHOTO: AP
When the Hong Kong Palace Museum was formally proposed in 2016, it was excoriated by pro-democracy lawmakers as a pet project of government officials eager to please Beijing. Conveniently, as the museum opens on Saturday, many of its critics are behind bars. The multibillion-dollar project was intended to strengthen Hong Kongers’ appreciation for Chinese culture through exhibits of prized Chinese artefacts. In June Carrie Lam, the outgoing chief executive, pitched the museum as a way to enhance the city’s “cultural confidence and the sense of national pride”. A tall order: after years of repression, just 2% of Hong Kong youth identify as Chinese rather than as Hongkongers.

Opposition lawmakers used to do what they could to fight for transparency and accountability, by scrutinising politicised and lavishly funded projects. None of them is in the legislature any more. The new museum displays some remarkable, centuries-old Chinese objects. It is also a memorial to what Hong Kong used to be.

The Tour de France kicks off

PHOTO: REUTERS
Cyclists in the Tour de France are known to indulge in a few pre- and post-race rituals. Riders will not shave their legs on the eve of competition lest their bodies expend energy regrowing hair. Afterwards, dentists will mend cyclists’ teeth, ground down during the event. This year’s Tour, which began in Copenhagen on Friday, covers 3,353km, roughly the same distance as that between the American-Canadian border and Mexico City. To stay in contention riders will have to average around 40kph on rural roads, up lung-busting mountain passes and even along sections of slippery, bone-shaking cobblestones.

Tadej Pogacar, a 23-year-old Slovenian, is gunning for his third consecutive victory. Chris Froome, a British veteran who has claimed the maillot jaune four times, is back in the saddle after three years and may ruin Mr Pogacar’s winning streak. After three weeks of pain, the champion will roll down the Champs-Elysées in Paris on July 24th.

Weekend profile: “Bongbong” Marcos, the Philippines’ new president

PHOTO: EPA
Ferdinand “Bongbong” Marcos Junior and his wife, Liza Araneta-Marcos, love Marvel movies. One day late last year, they were watching “Ant-Man”, a film about a superhero who can manipulate his size, when he turned to her and said “Okay, we’re gonna do this.” Do what? Mrs Araneta-Marcos asked. “Run for the presidency,” replied Mr Marcos, who is universally known as Bongbong. On June 30th, he was inaugurated as president of the Philippines and, soon after, arrived at Malacañang Palace, his official residence for the next six years.

For Bongbong, aged 64, it was a homecoming. He first moved into Malacañang in 1965 as a seven-year-old, when his father, Ferdinand Marcos, became president. They stayed until 1986—when Marcos senior, who declared martial law in 1972 and whose reign descended into a brutal, kleptocratic dictatorship—was forced into exile by a popular, peaceful revolution. The Marcoses are thought to have plundered billions of state money while in power. It has been said they took millions of dollars of cash, gold bars and jewellery with them when they fled. Looking back, Bongbong remembers those years fondly: “You were a little spoiled, especially as a kid. You were very well attended to. You were very well cared for,” he told CNN Philippines in April.

Marcos senior died in 1989, and the family was allowed to return to the Philippines in 1991. Imelda, Bongbong’s mother, immediately set about trying to rehabilitate the family name. She ran for the presidency and lost badly. But Bongbong won a seat in the House of Representatives from the Marcoses’ traditional stronghold of Ilocos Norte, in the north of the country. He has served as a congressman, senator or governor for most of the past 30 years. In 2016 he ran for vice-president, but lost narrowly.

On May 9th he trounced his closest rival for the presidency. With 59% of the vote, he has the strongest mandate of any president since his father. The victory probably means less to Mr Marcos, whom observers and friends describe as “laid-back”, than it does to his mother. Imelda, now 92, never accepted that Filipinos had turned against her family or admitted any wrongdoing. Indeed, none of the Marcoses has ever apologised for the cruelty or plunder of the dictatorship. With Bongbong back in Malacañang, she will stand vindicated. As for Bongbong himself, he could not resist using his inauguration speech to praise his father’s rule. He got things done, Bongbong said. “So will it be with his son.”

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Factual clues

1 down: Who warned this week the war in Ukraine “could take years” (11)

1 across: An American institution with its popularity at an all-time low (6)

2 across: A type accused of getting all the good jobs in Singapore (5)

3 across: Boots’s has to come from old-style retailing (6)

Cryptic clues

1 down: Secretary-general is gent at sea with lobster (11)

1 across: Mascot used to shield the Supremes (6)

2 across: Former lover a soft touch living abroad (5)

3 across: Good? Worth destroying! Excrescence! (6)

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent in Friday's edition.


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Jin-Hong Park, Suwon, South Korea

North America: Umesh Balasubramaniam, San Diego, United States

Central and South America: Gines Sánchez, Panama City, Panama

Europe: Serban Ionescu, Bucharest, Romania

Africa: Hassan Alaoui, Rabat, Morocco

Oceania: Ewen Mackenzie-Bowie, Auckland, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of Carol Moseley Braun, Oliver Hardy, “In the Bleak Midwinter”, The Times and mutual funds. The theme is Charles Dickens novels (“A Christmas Carol”, “Oliver Twist”, “Bleak House”, “Hard Times” and “Our Mutual Friend”).

Any knowledge that doesn’t lead to new questions quickly dies out: it fails to maintain the temperature required for sustaining life.

Wislawa Szymborska
