The world in brief
August 2, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Donald Trump was charged with four federal counts related to his role in efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election and the January 6th attack on the Capitol. The indictment—the second brought by Jack Smith, an independent special counsel—accuses the former president of conspiring to defraud America, to obstruct an “official proceeding” (the certification of the vote) and to deprive people of their right to vote and have their vote counted. In an earlier social-media post Mr Trump dismissed the imminent charges as a “Fake Indictment”.

Fitch, a rating agency, downgraded America’s credit rating from AAA to AA+. Fitch cited a “steady deterioration” in fiscal governance, including repeated fights over the debt ceiling, and expectations that the government’s deficit would rise further. In a statement Janet Yellen, the treasury secretary, said the downgrade was based on outdated data that have since improved under the Biden administration.

Myanmar’s junta pardoned Aung San Suu Kyi, a jailed former leader, for five of the 19 trumped-up charges against her, although it said she will remain under house arrest. Ms Suu Kyi was ousted as the country’s de facto leader in 2021 and a civil war has raged since. The government said more than 7,000 prisoners have been freed in an amnesty. The announcements came a day after the army extended the country’s state of emergency and indefinitely postponed elections due to be held in August.

A drone hit a building in Moscow containing three Russian ministries for the second time in two days. There were no reported injuries, but some employees are working remotely. A similar attack on Sunday forced an airport in the city to shut temporarily. Ukraine has not claimed the strikes, but a Ukrainian presidential adviser said that Moscow is “getting used to a full-fledged war”.

France began evacuating its citizens and other Europeans from Niger, a former colony, amid fierce anti-French sentiment since a military coup last week. Earlier Burkina Faso and Mali, two neighbours also run by military officers, warned that “military intervention” would be a “declaration of war.” On Sunday the Economic Community of West African States threatened to use force against Niger’s military.

Unemployment in the euro zone maintained its all-time low of 6.4% in June. The bloc’s labour market has proved resilient despite lacklustre economic growth; GDP expanded by just 0.3% in the second quarter of 2023. But many economists expect the unemployment rate to increase later this year, as the impact of rising interest rates is felt in the economy.

NASA picked up “heartbeat” signals from its spacecraft Voyager 2, the first such contact with the probe in nearly two weeks. On July 21st NASA accidentally ordered the craft to turn its antennae away from Earth, rendering it unable to transmit data. Launched in 1977, Voyager 2 is nearly 20bn kilometres from Earth, on a mission to study the solar system’s outer planets and interstellar space.

Figure of the day: 107,000, the number of Americans who died of drug overdoses in 2021. The vast majority were linked to heroin or fentanyl. Read the full story.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Kashmir’s status under scrutiny
Nearly four years ago India’s government split Jammu & Kashmir, a northern state, into two federally-run territories. The decision thrilled the Hindu-nationalist supporters of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party. They had long resented the extra autonomy granted to India’s only majority-Muslim state, which had its own constitution and flag.

India’s government insists that the reorganisation has brought an “unprecedented era of peace and progress” to the region. But it required gutting an article of the national constitution that gave J&K its special status. Activists and lawyers immediately challenged the legality of that in the Supreme Court.

On Wednesday five judges will finally begin hearing that case, as well as petitions related to media freedom, internet shutdowns and political imprisonment in the region. Kashmiris, who chafe under the yoke of 500,000 soldiers in the territory, hope that the Supreme Court’s verdict will provide them with some relief.


PHOTO: AP
Niger’s descent into disaster
In Niger, where soldiers toppled the president a week ago, the chaos could get worse. The Economic Community of West African States, the regional bloc, gave the junta until Sunday to reinstate Mohamed Bazoum. If the soldiers do not, it says it may intervene with force. The generals running the neighbouring jihadist-hit countries of Mali and Burkina Faso responded that this would be a declaration of war on them, too.

Despite an attempt by the president of Chad to mediate, the junta is not backing down. Instead it arrested more politicians. On Tuesday France, the former colonial power whose embassy was attacked by protesters brandishing Russian flags, began to evacuate Europeans. That is a worrying sign for the millions of Nigeriens who have nowhere to flee. Expect the junta to call for more demonstrations to try to show ECOWAS that any intervention would meet popular opposition—and guarantee civilian bloodshed.



PHOTO: ALAMY
Profits from processed food
Big packaged-food sellers have done reasonably well in tumultuous times. Sales were buoyant during the pandemic, which kept consumers out of restaurants. Even now sales are strong. Buyers seem unwilling to give up the convenience of eating at home. Food makers have been able to pass on to them higher costs of inputs, caused in part by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. As inflation comes down, companies may benefit: their costs may fall more quickly than the prices they charge to consumers.

Kraft Heinz, a big American multinational that owns such brands as Heinz ketchup and Oscar Mayer sausages, reports its quarterly earnings on Wednesday. Earnings per share last quarter exceeded expectations, as did revenue. Expectations are even higher this time.

But trouble is simmering. A backlash against ultra-processed foods is becoming more intense. Some activist investors want food firms to sell more wholesome grub and to be more transparent about the “health profile” of products. That might not go down well in the boardroom.


PHOTO: EARTH OVERSHOOT DAY
Humans tip into an ecological overdraft
Wednesday marks Earth Overshoot Day, the day on the calendar on which humans have used more resources than ecosystems can generate for the whole year. From now until January 1st 2024 humanity will be using more natural resources—including fish stocks, fibres and medicines provided by plants and the ability of forests to sequester carbon, among many other things—than the planet can supply this year.

By consistently overspending its biological budget, humanity is reducing the biodiversity on which its survival depends. The overshoot date, calculated by the Global Footprint Network, a think-tank, using data collected by the UN, has been coming earlier almost every year since 1971.

Rich countries, unsurprisingly, are the most profligate. A study published in 2022 in Lancet Planetary Health, a journal, found that America and the EU were respectively responsible for 27% and 25% of the overuse of natural resources. The global south was responsible for just 8%.


PHOTO: RANDA SHAATH
Searching for a forgotten author
Enayat al-Zayyat, an Egyptian writer, penned only one book. She never got to see it published. In her mid-twenties she took her own life. Her contemporaries whispered that a publisher’s rejection of her novel had driven her to despair. The vulnerable, semi-autobiographical debut, “Love and Silence”, was published posthumously in Arabic in 1967. It was widely, but briefly, praised. And then it was forgotten.

Almost three decades later Iman Mersal, an Egyptian poet, came across a rare copy of “Love and Silence” in a market in Cairo. Drawn to the writing, she decided to do research into Zayyat’s life, spending years speaking to those who knew her and uncovering the tragedies and joys of her short life in 20th-century Egypt.

“Traces of Enayat”, which was published in Arabic in 2019 and in English this week, is the culmination of those efforts. But the book is not quite a biography. It is, rather, an account of Ms Mersal’s feverish attempts to retrace the steps of a lost author.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which businessman served as Secretary of commerce during the Trump administration?

Tuesday: In the post-war era, who was the first African-American to play major league baseball?

The price one pays for pursuing any profession or calling is an intimate knowledge of its ugly side.

James Baldwin
