The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (05:02 GMT+1 / 12:02 Hong Kong)

The White House denounced China’s “provocative military activity” around Taiwan, and warned that a “mistake”, such as an ill-directed missile, could lead to real conflict. China’s drills have entered their second day. On the first, it fired missiles over the self-governing island, deployed fighter jets and warships, and practised a blockade. Commercial airlines and ships are giving the area a wide berth. Nancy Pelosi, the speaker of America’s House of Representatives, whose visit to Taiwan on Tuesday prompted China’s ire, said she had no intention of “changing the status quo”.

The Democrats in America’s Senate cleared a final obstacle on their way to passing a climate-health-and-tax-reform omnibus, by pulling their recalcitrant partisan, Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, on side. The other holdout, Joe Manchin of West Virginia, rejoined the fold last week. Ms Sinema won a concession to protect financiers from more swingeing taxation, and further relief for her drought-stricken state.

Brittney Griner, an American basketball player, was sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment by a Russian court. Ms Griner has been detained in Moscow since February 17th, when customs officials discovered a small amount of cannabis in her luggage. Joe Biden called the sentencing “unacceptable”; his government has urged the swap of a notorious Russian arms smuggler to secure her release.

Viktor Orban, Hungary’s prime minister, gave the opening speech at CPAC, a gathering of mostly American right-wingers, in Texas. Mr Orban’s model of “illiberal democracy”, which includes building a border fence, railing against multiculturalism and banning gender studies, has made him a darling of the American right—and a bogeyman to liberals on both sides of the pond.

Warner Brothers Discovery said that it would ditch its “streaming-first” model—the first big withdrawal from the streaming wars being fought between companies such as Netflix, Disney and Apple. The firm—formed in May upon the merger of WarnerMedia and Discovery—will ponder free ad-based channels and pursue more licensing of its films. It announced the about-turn as it marked a $3.4bn net loss for the latest quarter.

A jury in Texas ordered Alex Jones, a right-wing conspiracy theorist, to pay $4m to the parents of a six-year-old child killed in the Sandy Hook school massacre in 2012. The four-year-long legal dispute began after Mr Jones claimed that the mass shooting, in which 26 people died, was staged. Next the jury will decide whether to make Mr Jones pay separate punitive damages. He then faces two more defamation trials.

America declared monkeypox a public health emergency, paving the way for additional funding and improved data collection to help contain the outbreak. America has recorded some 6,600 cases of monkeypox, a quarter of the total worldwide. The virus is similar to smallpox though less fatal. The move by the Biden administration follows a similar declaration last month by the World Health Organisation.

Fact of the day: $1trn, the amount that the war in Ukraine has taken off forecasts for global GDP in 2022. Read the full story.

India’s economic risks pile up

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
For months, as central banks around the world tightened monetary policy, the Reserve Bank of India held firm, wary of jeopardising a fragile economic recovery from the pandemic. In May, however, the RBI sprung into action. It increased interest rates by 0.4 percentage points, and again by 0.5 percentage points in June. The annual inflation rate, which was 7% in July, has now exceeded the RBI’s upper threshold of 6% for five consecutive months. On Friday it is expected to announce yet another raise that would push rates back to pre-pandemic levels.

It is not just inflation that the bank is worrying about. The value of the rupee fell to its lowest-ever against the dollar in July, forcing the RBI to draw on foreign reserves to prevent further damage. India’s trade deficit has ballooned, too. The RBI need not look far to see the cost of mismanagement. Bangladesh, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are already in deep economic trouble.

Gold loses its lustre

PHOTO: ALAMY
AngloGold Ashanti, the world’s fourth-largest gold producer, wants its results to shine on Friday, as it reports on the changes made by the chief executive appointed in July 2021. But financial markets are unlikely to be impressed. The gold miner’s share price has dropped by 60% from its all-time high in July 2020. Similarly poor returns have been registered by competitors, including America’s Newmont and Canada’s Barrick Gold. That is in part because gold miners often outperform gold in a rising market, but also sink lower when it is on the way down. The metal’s price has dropped by 14.5% since March.

Historically, bullion has been seen as a safe haven amid inflation—and the shares of its miners as a hedge. This time around, the miners are suffering from higher costs without benefiting from higher prices. Either speculators think inflation is temporary or, for now at least, gold’s historic insurance role is waning.

The sultan and the tsar

PHOTO: AP
Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Vladimir Putin meet in Sochi on Friday for their second summit in 17 days. The war in Ukraine has brought Turkey and Russia’s leaders closer, but also shifted the balance of power in their relationship. Mr Putin is more isolated than ever and suffering humiliations on the battlefield. His Turkish counterpart, until recently a pariah in Western capitals, has made himself indispensable by brokering a deal to release Ukrainian and Russian grain exports across the Black Sea.

But Turkey also needs Russia for its money. Mr Erdogan’s government has not joined in Western sanctions, making his country a destination for oligarchs’ superyachts and potentially also for their investments. Last week the Kremlin said it is buying $6.1bn in Turkish treasury bonds as part of a loan deal for the Russian-built Akkuyu nuclear power plant, currently under construction on the Mediterranean coast. The cash will provide a much needed boost to Turkey’s shrinking foreign currency reserves.

The Edinburgh Festival struggles to stay festive

PHOTO: ALAMY
The first Edinburgh International Festival was held in 1947 to rebuild cultural ties across Europe following the ravages of the second world war. Since then it has prided itself on its cosmopolitanism; in 2019 2,800 artists from over 40 countries performed in classical music, theatre and dance shows.

This year’s edition, which starts on Friday, is fighting to hold up that mantle. The war in Ukraine, chaos in the airline industry and Brexit have created a perfect storm of logistical challenges. There is a shortage of temporary workers, burdensome documentation and visa requirements are holding up European artists and the cost of shipping equipment has rocketed. Many performers are worried about having to cancel at the last minute because of covid-19; audiences, duly wary, are not booking their tickets in advance, depriving shows of cash. In its 75th year, the festival is having to try harder than ever to preserve its international roots.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: What was the aristocratic title of Princess Margaret’s husband, Antony Armstrong-Jones?

Thursday: Which Japanese camera film company was established in 1934?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Vincent Ko Chun Keat, Kedah, Malaysia

North America: Jug Stanovcic, Kansas City, United States

Europe: Rhea Ganapathy, Barcelona, Spain.

Africa: Lasse Herdien, Cape Town, South Africa

Oceania: Roberta MacDonald, Runaway Bay, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Nancy Pelosi, NASDAQ, Paris and Israel. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

America’s job market comes off the boil

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Having run hot for 18 months, the labour market in America may at last be softening. Data due on Friday are expected to show that the economy added about 250,000 jobs in July, the fewest since the end of 2020. That would be a solid result: a slowdown in job creation ought to lessen inflationary pressure while avoiding the steep employment losses commonly seen during recessions.
The question is how long this Goldilocks scenario can last. Even with the slight cooling in the labour market, private-sector wages are rising at an annual pace of more than 5%. That is far too fast for the Federal Reserve to succeed in bringing inflation back to its target of roughly 2%. Moreover, the economy has yet to feel the full brunt of the central bank’s recent interest-rate increases. The still robust job figures in July may thus be a way-station on a path towards more lay-offs.


The function of freedom is to free someone else.

Toni Morrison
