The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (21:57 GMT / 05:57 Hong Kong)

Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orban, said his country’s parliament will ratify Finland and Sweden’s accession to NATO early next year, a move that would leave only Turkey yet to approve the Nordic countries’ membership. Meanwhile, Ukraine continued to reckon with the consequences of Russia’s strikes on its infrastructure, which caused mass blackouts. The head of Ukraine’s nuclear agency, Energoatom, said the strikes risked “catastrophe” after the Zaporizhia nuclear plant was again disconnected from the national grid. Earlier Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, accused Russia of “crimes against humanity”, while addressing the UN Security Council.

The European Commission’s proposals for a cap on gas prices met a frosty response at a meeting of EU energy ministers, who will gather in December to agree on a plan. The EC’s proposal included capping prices only when they exceeded €275 ($284) per megawatt-hour, and if European prices diverged from those of global LNG. Poland’s climate minister, Anna Moskwa, called the plan a “kind of joke”.

The UN’s Human Rights Council launched an investigation into Iran’s lethal crackdown on the protests that have engulfed the country since mid-September. The council voted to establish an international fact-finding mission to probe allegations of what the UN’s human-rights chief called “unnecessary and disproportionate use of force”. An estimated 400 Iranians have been killed, and some 15,000 arrested, amid protests sparked by the death in custody of Mahsa Amini, who was arrested for not “properly” wearing her hijab.

The king of Malaysia chose Anwar Ibrahim to become the country’s prime minister, after an election on November 19th resulted in a hung parliament. Malaysians waited five days for a new leadership to emerge, as the incumbent coalition failed to make an alliance with its rising challengers. Mr Anwar waited for much, much longer. The 75-year-old has led Malaysia’s opposition as a liberal-democratic reformer for most of his career, including years spent in prison.

Russia’s parliament passed a law that broadens the scope of an existing ban on promoting “LGBT propaganda” to children. The ban will now pertain to information disseminated to anyone, regardless of age. Russia’s LGBT communities have long suffered persecution from the authorities, who cast the new legislation as a defence of traditional values in contrast with Western decadence.

Twitter shut its office in Brussels, sparking fears among EU officials that the social-media platform will not follow EU rules on moderating online speech, as the fallout from Elon Musk’s takeover continues. Before he bought Twitter Mr Musk suggested he wanted to reduce its moderation rules in order to create a digital “public sphere” that enshrines free speech.

Data from America’s Department of Agriculture show that a record 50.5m birds had been wiped out by the deadliest outbreak of avian influenza in the country’s history. Officials date the start of the outbreak to February; since then, commercial and backyard flocks of chickens, turkeys and other birds have been infected in 46 states. The outbreak caused turkey prices to soar in the run-up to the Thanksgiving holiday.

Fact of the day: 1.4m, the number of homes that Hornsea 2, the world’s largest wind farm, can power. Read the full story.

Hong Kong’s Catholics under threat

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Friday Cardinal Joseph Zen, a former Bishop of Hong Kong, will be sentenced for the crime of raising money for pro-democracy protesters. Unlike many of the people he helped—more than 1,000 have been sentenced to prison—the 90-year-old is likely to get only a fine. Cardinal Zen’s hopes for democracy in Hong Kong, shared by many of the territory’s Catholics, were crushed by China’s Communist Party. Now the party is going after their faith, too.

On the mainland China’s regime increasingly exerts control over Catholic churches, in part by pressuring them to register with the government. Clergy at registered churches must impart Communist Party doctrine to parishioners. A secret deal signed in 2018 by China and the Vatican is thought to give the party authority to nominate bishops.

The “sinicisation” of Catholicism has now reached Hong Kong. Catholic missionaries in the city say that mainland-style control is coming. One priest from Hong Kong says that churches there will remain open, but only cowed believers will worship in them.

Bangladesh fires up a new coal plant

PHOTO: AP
On Friday a new coal-fired power station will begin operating in southern Bangladesh. The project sits 14km from the Sundarbans, the world’s largest mangrove forest and a UNESCO heritage site. The plant, which cost $2bn to build, will burn 5m tonnes of coal each year. Bangladesh’s government hailed it as a symbol of co-operation with neighbouring India, the project’s main financier. But the plant is controversial: environmentalists opposed it and demanded that private banks not fund it, partly because of the threat it poses to the forest.

Bangladesh’s energy policy is cleaner than this fiasco suggests. Last year the government scrapped plans to construct ten coal-fired power stations after pressure from activists and trouble getting the necessary investments. It has instead focused largely on building natural-gas and nuclear plants. But domestic gas reserves are declining and imports are expensive. Regular blackouts—last month more than 100m people were plunged into darkness—may also slow Bangladesh’s transition away from the world’s dirtiest fuel.


Businesses brace for a bad Black Friday

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Black Friday, when retailers around the world offer a dizzying array of discounts, usually marks the beginning of a merry season of frenzied consumerism. This year may be different. In October retail sales in America were higher than expected, but sales of electronics and various other discretionary goods continued to fall as consumers’ wallets were squeezed by inflation. That may spell trouble for businesses banking on an orgy of overindulgence.

To lure customers, American retailers have introduced deeper Black Friday discounts than in previous years. But even after these deals, inflation still makes many products more expensive than last year’s shopping season. And because their bank accounts are no longer bulked up by savings made during the early months of the pandemic, shoppers have less to splurge.

The football World Cup may squeeze sales further. With America and England playing each other on Friday, consumers have yet another reason to steer clear of the crowds of bargain-hunters.

Rebels without a pause

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The east of Congo is home to one of the world’s forgotten wars. Or, rather, to many forgotten wars. More than 100 militias operate in the region, mostly local groups fighting for land and commodities. But one, M23, is more disruptive than others—over the past year it has seized towns and killed dozens of people. Congo and the UN reckon the group is backed by Rwanda, and that its attacks are part of a broader contest for power in the Great Lakes, a region of 100m people across Congo, Rwanda and Uganda.

On Wednesday regional leaders meeting in Angola gave M23 an ultimatum: if a ceasefire is not in place in eastern Congo by 6pm local time on Friday, then Kenyan-led troops may force M23 to lay down arms. Even Rwanda’s foreign minister signed the statement calling for peace. But Congolese—who have endured more than three decades of violence—will believe it only when they see it.

Another outing for Lady Chatterley’s Lover

PHOTO: SEAMUS RYAN/NETFLIX
In “Lady Chatterley’s Lover” the heroine wishes for men to “leave [her] alone”. Film-makers seem unwilling to do the same to D.H. Lawrence’s final novel, first published in 1928 (obscenity laws meant that uncensored copies weren’t sold in America and Britain for another 30 years). The book—detailing the affair of an aristocrat and her gamekeeper—has been repeatedly adapted in the decades since.

The latest version, made for Netflix, will appear in cinemas in America and Britain from Friday and on the streaming service in December. Laure de Clermont-Tonnerre, the film’s French director, is not the first to apply a feminist lens to the story. In 2006 Pascale Ferran, another French director, was lauded for focusing on Lady Chatterley’s perspective (writers including Simone de Beauvoir had previously taken Lawrence to task for his patriarchal pomposity). Ms Clermont-Tonnerre’s take also focuses on the environment, championing the natural world that “mechanised greed” has ruined. What was once seen as simply blue is cast in a more modern shade of green.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which counterculture festival takes place in Nevada in late August and early September?

Thursday: Which children’s toy was named after the 26th president of America?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Rajesh Ramam, Singapore

North America: Rebecca Clements, Toronto, Canada

Central and South America: Ramon Azpurua, Caracas, Venezuela

Europe: Jean Francois Duffour, Coublieve, France

Africa: Gustav Melck, Pretoria, South Africa

Oceania: Richard Lyon, Greenwich, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Bankman-Fried, Basque, anger and Dnipro. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Every human being, of whatever origin, of whatever station, deserves respect.

U Thant
