The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (23:33 GMT+1 / 06:33 Hong Kong)

Russia’s ruling party proposed holding referendums on the status of occupied Ukrainian territories on November 4th, according to AFP. A vote in occupied Crimea in 2014 was used by Russia to justify the annexation of the peninsula. Meanwhile the commander of Ukraine’s armed forces, Valeriy Zaluzhnyi, confirmed that a string of recent explosions in Russia-occupied Crimea were conducted by Ukrainian forces, the country’s first official admission of its role in the attacks.

The Biden administration announced that tech firms which receive federal funding under its new CHIPS Act will not be allowed to build any “advanced technology” facilities, or factories, in China for ten years. The move was justified on national security grounds, amidst fears of China stealing such technology. America also wants to rebuild its own share of the global semiconductor market, now just 10%, down from nearly 40% in 1990.

Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, admitted that Europeans faced “tough times” because of sky-high energy prices caused by Russia’s manipulation of natural gas supplies. Ms von der Leyen announced five proposals to ease Europe’s energy crisis, including a price cap on Russian gas and a windfall tax on energy companies, which she called a “solidarity contribution”.

Police apprehended the surviving suspect in Sunday’s stabbing spree in Saskatchewan, Canada, ending a four-day manhunt. Ten people were killed and 18 injured in the attacks in an indigenous community and nearby village. Myles Sanderson had been serving a sentence of four years and four months on assault and robbery charges when he was released on parole in February. His brother Damien was found dead on Monday.

Cineworld Group, the world’s second-largest cinema chain, filed for bankruptcy in Texas. The firm, which is based in London, intends to restructure its $9bn in debt and lease liabilities while maintaining theatre operations. The pandemic turbocharged at-home streaming at cinemas’ expense: Cineworld lost $2.7bn in 2020 and another $566m last year.

China’s president, Xi Jinping, will meet his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, next week on his first foreign trip since the start of the covid-19 pandemic in 2020, according to Russia’s outgoing ambassador to China. The two are expected to meet in Samarkand, Uzbekistan, which hosts a summit of the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation, a Chinese-led talking shop focused on economic and security affairs in Asia.

A judge refused Elon Musk’s request to delay the trial over his aborted acquisition of Twitter, which is due to start on October 17th. But she allowed him to include in his lawsuit recent allegations of lax data privacy by the social-media firm’s former security chief. Mr Musk claims Twitter misled him about its user numbers and other metrics, and wants out of the purchase agreement.

Fact of the day: 123, the average number of days patients in Spain wait for an operation, the most in 18 years. Read the full story.

Two ways of counting in Thai

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
When Prayuth Chan-ocha, then head of Thailand’s army, staged a coup to overthrow an elected government in May 2014, few thought he would dominate politics for long. Yet on Thursday the country’s constitutional court will consider how an eight-year term limit for prime ministers, codified in the constitution of 2017, might apply to Mr Prayuth.

The opposition argues that the prime minister’s time ran out last month. The same court suspended him from official duties on August 24th. But “Uncle Tu” argues that only the years after 2019, when his pro-army, royalist coalition won a majority in a general election, should count.

The pro-establishment court may well agree. This would trigger more anti-government protests, particularly among students. Economic troubles are already fanning discontent. Pheu Thai, the main opposition party, is eyeing a landslide in an election due next year, even after a change in the voting system. But in an autocracy built under the veil of democracy, it would be a miracle if Thais were soon allowed to get the government they actually want.

EU’ll be damned if you do, damned if you don’t

PHOTO: EPA
As private forecasters such as Oxford Economics downgrade Europe’s economic outlook to “recession”, the European Central Bank meets on Thursday to decide on how much to increase interest rates. Consumer-price inflation is very high: the latest figure, for August, was 9.1% compared with a year earlier—way above the bank’s target of 2%. Before the summer, the consensus was for an increase of 0.5 percentage points, but some pundits are expecting a step up of 0.75 points.

Is it the right call to increase interest rates at the beginning of a potential recession? After all, inflation in Europe is not the outcome of a booming economy, but mostly the result of exorbitant energy prices. These are starting to eat so deeply into consumers’ pockets and businesses’ tills that the economy is weakening fast on its own, even without the added burden of the ECB’s rate hikes. After underestimating the threat of inflation over the past year, the bank may now be underestimating the chances of a downturn.


Building back better in Beirut

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Beirut is no stranger to a rebuild. In its tumultuous 5,000-year history the city has had to revamp itself seven times, most recently after the civil war, which ended in 1990, and a conflict with Israel in 2006. Government negligence led to a huge blast that ravaged its port in 2020, killing over 200 people. The capital of Lebanon is now facing yet another reconstruction. But this time the international community has had the chance to offer ideas. On Thursday Inspireli Awards, a Czech architecture firm, will announce the winners of its Beirut Port Renewal Competition.

Judges will choose from 40 plans, from 19 countries, featuring outdoor theatres, museums, vast transport links and urban farms. The winning architects will collaborate with the port administration and the Lebanese government to hone their plans. The next test will be finding the money to pay for it all. It is an opportunity to reshape the future of a city, hopefully for good this time.

​​Macron’s new democratic wheeze

PHOTO: AP
The French president launches his latest brainchild on Thursday. The idea behind Emmanuel Macron’s Conseil National de la Refondation (roughly, national refoundation council) is to bring together politicians, unions, NGOs, business leaders and others to discuss solutions to big challenges including climate change and energy, employment, education, and health. The council is designed to revive democratic participation after low voter turn-out at presidential and parliamentary elections this year. It is also a riposte to those who accuse Mr Macron of excessive top-down rule and of not listening.

A heavyweight government team will attend the opening day in Marcoussis, a town near Paris. Sessions will be held in different settings across France for several months. Yet already all national opposition parties, and most unions, have boycotted the council, dismissing it as merely a talking shop. By denying Mr Macron a majority at parliamentary elections in June, French voters sent a clear message that they want more collaborative rule. So far, opposition politicians seem wedded to the old confrontational culture.

Pinocchio is having his moment

PHOTO: DISNEY+
In “Pinocchio”, released on Disney+ and in some cinemas on Thursday, Tom Hanks stars as Geppetto, a lonely Italian toymaker who carves a puppet that becomes a “real boy”. But Robert Zemeckis’s live-action remake of the classic animation, originally released by Disney in 1940, has company. Recent films bringing Pinocchio to life include Matteo Garrone’s drama from 2019 and “Pinocchio: A True Story”, a Russian version released earlier this year. Guillermo del Toro’s much-awaited stop-action version, using models, is expected to find its feet on Netflix in December.

What is behind this marionette mania? Perhaps the rise of AI, since Pinocchio is, after all, a kind of robot who runs amok. Or does his nose-extending mendacity strike a chord in an age of fake news? In Carlo Collodi’s “The Adventures of Pinocchio”, published in 1883, the nose growing plays a surprisingly minor role. But the book’s most important message is just as relevant today: it is only by caring for others that we become fully human.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: What is the alternative name for the stapes, a bone in the middle ear?
Thursday: What is the term for the smallest unit of information in a computer?

To label any subject unsuitable for comedy is to admit defeat.

Peter Sellers
