The world in brief
May 26, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Ron DeSantis’s presidential-campaign launch on Twitter was marred by technical glitches, delaying it by nearly half an hour, during which hundreds of thousands of users tuned out of the audio broadcast. Mr DeSantis was forced to deliver a truncated version of his stump speech, in which he promised to lead a “great American comeback”. In a later interview with Fox News, Mr DeSantis said as president he would ensure that “woke ideology ends up in the dustbin of history”.

Iran said that it had successfully test-launched a 2,000km-range ballistic missile. The country maintains that its missile programme, one of the biggest in the Middle East, is “defensive”. This weapon, however, will be capable of reaching Israel, a long-time foe. On Tuesday the chief of Israel’s armed forces warned of “action” over Iran’s nuclear developments.

Russia and Belarus signed a deal which would allow Russia to deploy tactical nuclear missiles on Belarusian territory. Both countries framed the decision as a defensive one, with Sergei Shoigu, Russia’s defence minister, calling it a response to the “sharp escalation of threats” from the West. Control of the weapons will remain with Moscow.

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said that Russia launched 36 Iranian drones towards Ukraine overnight. Mr Zelensky warned Iran against supplying more drones to Russia, saying that doing so could land them on “the dark side of history”. Meanwhile the head of the Wagner Group, a mercenary organisation, announced that his troops would transfer their positions in Bakhmut to the Russian military.

America’s Supreme Court limited the powers of the Environmental Protection Agency to regulate water pollution under the Clean Water Act. The court ruled that the agency’s power does not apply to some wetlands. It is the second time the court has restricted the EPA’s authority in less than a year, having previously curtailed its ability to curb emissions from power plants.

Britain announced record net migration figures, with 606,000 people added to the country’s population in 2022. One-off factors such as an influx of refugees from Ukraine and immigrants from Hong Kong (a total of 160,000) contributed to the increase. Asylum seekers were also included for the first time. Almost 40% of migrants came as students, although the total share of non-EU student immigration fell in 2022.

An iconic cotton tree in Freetown, Sierra Leone’s capital, was knocked down by heavy winds. The enormous tree—which is also depicted on the country’s banknotes—was considered a symbol of liberty. The freed American slaves who founded the country are believed to have huddled under its branches upon arrival to their new home. The country’s president declared it a “great loss to the nation”.

Figure of the day: 58%, the proportion of Republican primary votes that would vote for Donald Trump, according to polling conducted for The Economist by YouGov. Read the full story.


PHOTO: ACTION PRESS
Germany’s coalition government heats up
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine created such a sense of emergency in Germany that—for much of last year—tensions within the governing three-party coalition were swept under the carpet. But, as the war drags on, the pro-business Free Democratic Party and the Greens are increasingly getting into acrimonious fights. The latest is a row about a proposed law to ban the installation of new oil and gas boilers. The FDP is refusing to pass it, even though it had previously agreed to do so before the Bundestag breaks up in mid-June for summer holidays.

Robert Habeck, the embattled economy minister from the Greens, is accusing the FDP of breaking their word. The FDP says the law risks imposing too costly a burden on households. Bild, a tabloid, reported on Thursday that the FDP sent Mr Habeck 113 questions about the draft legislation. Though he supports the law, Olaf Scholz, the chancellor (from the coalition’s other party, the Social Democrats) is so far staying out of the scrap.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Sudan’s ceasefire hopes
The Sudanese people will spend the next few days anxiously waiting to see whether the current nationwide ceasefire is to be extended. The Sudanese Armed Forces, led by General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, and the Rapid Support Forces, a militia led by Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo, have been warring violently since April 15th. On Saturday, for the first time, they formally signed a deal to stop fighting—but only for seven days from Monday. The pause was to allow humanitarian aid into the country. That appears to have happened, albeit slowly.

The omens for an extension, however, are not good. Residents of Khartoum, the capital, and elsewhere have reported plenty of fighting this week, despite the truce and vague warnings from America’s diplomats about the potential repercussions for both sides. The SAF and RSF seem to have plenty of fight left in them, which is terrible news for the Sudanese, over a million of whom have already been forced to flee their homes.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A bubbly market
Although most households are suffering from high inflation at the supermarket till and petrol pump, some can still splash out on luxuries. Sales at upmarket clothing, jewellery and cosmetics makers like Hermès, LVMH and Richemont rose during the pandemic and have reached new heights since. Bernard Arnault, boss of LVMH, is now the world’s richest man. Another place to see this effervescence is at ​​Laurent-Perrier, a French champagne maker, which reports its annual earnings on Friday.

In the year to March 2022 revenues jumped by 57% to €306m and net income doubled to €50m. ​​Laurent-Perrier’s profit margin is a fizzy 19%. The share price this month bubbled past €140, nearly double its level at the start of lockdown three years ago. The economy may be brut for many, but prospects seem rosé for Laurent-Perrier.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
JPMorgan’s links to Jeffrey Epstein
Jamie Dimon, the boss of JPMorgan Chase, America’s biggest bank, will be deposed on Friday and Saturday in a pair of civil suits related to Jeffrey Epstein, a longtime client of the bank who hanged himself in 2019 while awaiting trial on federal sex-trafficking charges. The attorney-general for the US Virgin Islands, where Epstein lived on a private island, charges that JPMorgan obstructed law enforcement and, by providing financial services, facilitated his illegal activities.

The bank denies these charges, and instead claims that the government of the USVI was “complicit” in Mr Epstein’s crimes. On Tuesday the bank filed a case against the territory, alleging that high-ranking officials had “look[ed] the other way” in exchange for money and favours. Albert Bryan, governor of the USVI, will be deposed next month as part of the lawsuit. The USVI says this is an “obvious attempt” to shift blame away from JPMorgan. The finger-pointing continues.


PHOTO: KEITH HARING FOUNDATION
A Keith Haring moment
In 1986 the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam asked Keith Haring to put on an exhibition. It was the first major solo show for the 27-year-old street artist, who began his career creating hundreds of drawings in chalk on defunct advertising boards in the New York City subway. He was adamant that he shouldn’t be presented “simply as a ‘graffiti performer’”.

On Friday, for the first time in more than 30 years, the Stedelijk presents “Amsterdam Notes”, the 125-foot piece he created on the eve of that show. The museum’s director describes it as a “contemporary Bayeux tapestry”. It depicts human figures, monsters and animals dancing, flying and copulating.

A bigger collection of his work is showing at Akron Art Museum in Ohio until late September and an exhibition covering his entire career opens on Saturday at The Broad in Los Angeles. His vibrant work, which tackles themes such as the AIDS epidemic, racism and war, is as urgent as ever.


Daily Quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which pop singer achieved international success with “Never Gonna Give You Up”, his first single?

Thursday: Which car brand is based in Maranello, Italy?

Simplicity is the shortest path to a solution.

Ward Cunningham