The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 2, 2023

Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva was sworn in as Brazil’s president in Brasília, the country’s capital. The left-leaning politician was previously president from 2003 to 2010. He defeated Jair Bolsonaro, the far-right incumbent, in October in the closest election in Brazil’s recent history. Tens of thousands of Lula’s supporters thronged the streets of Brasília. Breaking with past practice, Mr Bolsonaro did not attend the ceremony.

Russia continued to bombard Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, and other major cities in the early hours of New Year’s Day. This followed a wave of strikes on Saturday that killed at least one person. In a New Year speech Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, accused the West of provoking Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and of trying to “weaken and split” his country. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, said that Mr Putin was “hiding”, and “burning” the Russian people’s own future.

The New Year has been celebrated around the world—in many places, without restrictions for the first time since the coronavirus pandemic began. Crowds gathered in China despite the sharp rise in coronavirus infections. But the turn of the year passed without the usual fireworks in Red Square, in Moscow; and the streets of Kyiv, a city under curfew, were empty. Malaysia’s government cancelled an event in Kuala Lumpur after a landslide in the country killed dozens and displaced thousands.

At midnight on Sunday Croatia adopted the euro as its currency and joined the Schengen passport-free travel area. The country became part of the EU in 2013 but was only given permission to join the single currency this summer, after the European Central Bank ruled that its economy was sufficiently aligned with others in the euro zone.

Kim Jong Un ordered an “exponential” expansion of North Korea’s nuclear arsenal. He also decreed that his country should launch its first spy satellite and develop new intercontinental ballistic missiles. North Korea rounded out 2022—a year in which it conducted a record number of weapons tests—by launching three ballistic missiles towards the Sea of Japan, according to South Korea.

Xi Jinping, China’s president, said his country “unswervingly stands on the right side of history”. In a televised New Year’s Eve address Mr Xi also acknowledged that his country had “entered a new phase” in its response to the covid-19 pandemic and faced “tough challenges”. Meanwhile the Philippines became the latest country to restrict or increase checks on travellers from China.

Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians attended a rally in Gaza to mark the 58th anniversary of the founding of the Fatah party. Although Fatah runs the Palestinian Authority, based in the West Bank, Hamas, its militant rival, controls the Gaza Strip and allowed the demonstration to go ahead. In Israel, which with Egypt blockades the Gaza Strip, a new, right-wing coalition government took office this week.

Fact of the day: 50m, the number of people who may be beginning 2023 on the brink of famine, according to the UN’s World Food Programme. Read the full article.

Electric pickup trucks could change attitudes in America

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Today we are looking ahead to this year’s big stories in business. Normal Espresso service returns on Tuesday

America is a laggard when it comes to adopting electric vehicles. But the electrification of the pickup truck—the practical, no-nonsense vehicle that embodies ruggedness—should help change attitudes to battery power. In 2023 a fleet of new models will join Ford’s F-150 Lightning and the R1T from Rivian (an EV-only startup), including an electric Chevrolet Silverado and Tesla’s much-delayed Cybertruck. Electric sceptics should be won over by white-knuckle performance, decent ranges and competitive prices in vehicles marketed as being just as practical and sturdy as petrol-powered alternatives.

But it will take more than nifty pickups for EVs to displace combustion-engine vehicles in America. Fuel is cheaper and emissions rules laxer than in greener Europe, where EVs accounted for almost one in five sales compared with around one in 20 across the Atlantic in 2021. America’s love affair with internal combustion is an enduring passion, meaning that the road to electrification will be long and winding.


The repairs business takes off

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Today we are looking ahead to this year’s big stories in business. Normal Espresso service returns on Tuesday

In 2023, many fashion brands will ramp up their repair services to encourage customers to mend damaged pieces of clothing instead of throwing them away. It is part of an industry-wide move to become more sustainable. LVMH, the world’s biggest luxury group, has promised it will announce new “sophisticated” after-care services.

Venture capitalists are thus throwing money into repairs. In 2022 Sojo, a London-based app which arranges drivers to ferry garments between tailor and customer, raised €2.2m ($2.2m). Save Your Wardrobe, another startup, secured $3m. It has teamed up with Zalando, Europe’s biggest online clothes retailer, which plans to extend the life of at least 50m products through resale and reuse by 2023.

Fast fashion is not about to release its stranglehold on the market: one study reckons it will be worth over $200bn by 2030, up from nearly $69bn in 2020. But in 2023 you may find yourself delving deep into your wardrobe to find something that can be given new life.

Who will be tech's winners and losers of 2023?

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Today we are looking ahead to this year’s big stories in business. Normal Espresso service returns on Tuesday

For technology firms, 2022 was a torrid year. Soaring inflation, rising interest rates and geopolitical turmoil saw the value of high-growth firms plummet. The Nasdaq Composite, a tech-heavy index, climbed by 21% in 2021, during lockdown, but sank by over 40% in 2020. What will 2023 bring?

The answer will vary by sector, and company size. Consumer-facing tech firms were the first to see their sales fall in 2022. Some of that is likely to continue. Outfits that make their money by selling ads, such as Google and Meta, have also struggled, as marketing budgets were squeezed. Makers of business software, such as Adobe and Oracle, will probably fare better.

Big firms tend to be more resilient in a downturn, partly because they hold plenty of cash. That can help them retain talent and acquire firms at bargain-bin prices. Tech’s big shake-up, in other words, may help the sector’s giants grow even bigger in 2023.

Expect more corporate activism

PHOTO: REUTERS
Today we are looking ahead to this year’s big stories in business. Normal Espresso service returns on Tuesday

When America’s Supreme Court overturned Roe v Wade in June 2022, the ruling that in 1973 declared abortion a constitutional right, hundreds of companies responded by, for example, expanding reproductive health-care options for female employees. It was a good example of a new wave of corporate activism, encouraged by consumers, employees and shareholders alike. Investors know that markets respond when companies take a stance. A study by the Yale School of Management found that the shares of companies that pulled out of Russia soon after it invaded Ukraine outperformed those of companies that dawdled, or chose to stay.

As well as abortion, in 2023 companies may be judged on their approaches to climate change and the energy transition, gay and transgender rights, racial diversity and ethical labour practices. And getting more political does not oblige companies to be progressive. Activist consumers tend to reward companies that show consistency in sticking to principles of any hue, rather than just pandering to the latest fad.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which character in “Pride and Prejudice” proposes marriage to Elizabeth Bennet before marrying her best friend?

It is only afterward that a new idea seems reasonable. To begin with, it usually seems unreasonable.

Isaac Asimov
