The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (05:16 GMT+1 / 12:16 Hong Kong)

Shinzo Abe, who was Japan’s longest-serving prime minister, was rushed to hospital after being shot while making a speech in the western city of Nara, according to local news reports. Police immediately apprehended a man at the scene. Mr Abe’s condition is thought to be critical. Japan has extremely strict gun laws and shootings there are highly unusual.

The race to be the next leader of Britain’s ruling Conservative Party began after Boris Johnson announced his resignation from the role. Mr Johnson intends to stay on as prime minister until that contest is concluded, which could take months, though it is unclear if he will be allowed to do so. Several ministers have already thrown their hats into the ring for the top job.

Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, claimed that his country was only getting started in its invasion of Ukraine but suggested that he was still open to peace talks. Mr Putin also warned the West that the war is heading towards a “tragedy for the Ukrainian people”. Meanwhile Ukraine raised its flag on Snake Island, a strategically important landmass in the Black Sea, one week after Russia’s withdrawal.

Unemployment claims in America reached a six-month high, at 235,000 for the week ending July 2nd, the Labour Department reported. The numbers may signal that layoffs are rising amid an economic slowdown. Multiple big employers, including Coinbase, Netflix and Tesla announced workforce cuts in recent weeks.

A jury in California convicted Ramesh “Sunny” Balwani on 12 counts of fraud related to his tenure as second-in-command at Theranos, a failed blood-testing startup. Each charge carries a maximum sentence of 20 years’ imprisonment. Elizabeth Holmes, the company’s founder, was found guilty of fraud in January and is awaiting sentencing.

The European Court of Human Rights found Greece guilty of not effectively investigating human-rights violations during migrant “pushbacks”. In Safi and Others v Greece, the applicants claimed that a coastguard vessel, in pushing them back towards Turkish waters, had caused the migrant boat to capsize, resulting in 11 deaths. The Court ruled that Greece had breached the right to life and the prohibition on torture.

America’s Treasury delivered a “framework” to President Joe Biden which outlined the need for shared global standards to better regulate cryptocurrencies. The Treasury said that “uneven regulation, supervision and compliance across jurisdictions” risks hurting businesses, consumers, investors and markets. The framework also says that America should lead global discussions on central bank’s issuing digital currencies.

Fact of the day: 54,000, the number of words in Chile’s proposed constitution. Read the full story.

Indian tech grapples with global slowdown

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Friday India’s second most valuable company, Tata Consultancy Services, will report its quarterly earnings. TCS was established in 1968 to provide financial and technology services to other businesses in the Tata empire. Indian technology firms had a good pandemic, as international companies turned to them to digitise their operations. But TCS’s results, likely to show squeezed margins, will illustrate the sector’s recent change in fortunes.

In the last financial year Indian software exports reached an all-time high of $150bn, or 5.6% of national GDP. McKinsey, a consultancy, estimates that salaries in India’s tech sector increased by 20-30% over the past year. But things have since cooled, largely because of the slowdown in the West. America accounts for at least 40% of revenues for Indian tech companies. JPMorgan Chase, a bank, is bearish on the sector. Some stocks are down by more than half on their 52-week highs. The industry will be watching TCS closely.

Why Russian inflation is different

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Like most countries, Russia is suffering from high inflation. Consumer prices are about 12% higher than they were at the beginning of the year. But Russia’s experience is different from other places in two important ways.

The first is the cause. In most countries, inflation is the result largely of rising energy prices. America is dealing with the effects of excessive fiscal stimulus. But prices in Russia are surging because of the collapse of the rouble in February and March and the Western sanctions imposed in the wake of its invasion of Ukraine. Both have raised the cost of imports.

The second difference is that, unlike in most countries, inflation in Russia is slowing. Weekly prices are falling. Thanks to capital controls, the rouble has started to rise. The central bank has jacked up interest rates, reducing demand. And Russia has enough cheap oil to last a lifetime. The economy still looks rocky, but Russia’s bout of inflation is probably over.

Less hiring please: America’s jobs market

PHOTO: AP
Companies, investors and government officials normally love a surprise on the upside in job-creation figures, taking it as evidence of economic vigour. But when America publishes its employment data for June on Friday, they will be crossing their fingers for signs of softness instead. The labour market is exceptionally tight, with nearly two job vacancies per unemployed worker. That has fuelled wage growth. A weaker patch for hiring is needed to help bring inflation under control.

Forecasters expect to learn that America added about 270,000 jobs last month. That would be the lowest total in a year, with wage gains also moderating somewhat. By itself that would not be enough to declare victory over inflation. But it would suggest that the economy is moving in the right direction: a cooler jobs market without yet tumbling into recession. Still, achieving that balance will only get tougher in the coming months, as higher interest rates weigh on businesses and consumers.

Lebanon moves to deport Syrian refugees

PHOTO: AP
There are 1.5m Syrian refugees in Lebanon, exiles from civil war in their home country. Their hosts want to send them back. This week Issam Sharaf el-Din, Lebanon’s minister for the displaced, unveiled plans to expel 15,000 Syrians per month. He hopes to begin deportations within months.

Around 90% of Syrian refugees in Lebanon are in extreme poverty; many live in informal settlements. But Lebanon has troubles of its own: GDP has plummeted by more than 50% since 2018, and many Lebanese blame refugees, from Syria as well as Palestine, for exacerbating the economic crisis. Last month the head of the Maronite Church called for a “final solution” to the problem of refugees on Lebanese soil.

Lebanon’s government is uninterested in objections from refugees and human-rights groups that they would be expelling Syrians into danger. Indeed, Mr el-Din insists that Syria is now “safe”. But this week’s news plunges Lebanon’s army of refugees into fresh uncertainty.

Judgment days for football’s ex-supremos

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
“I’m in a good mood”, Sepp Blatter told a Swiss court last month. For an 86-year-old facing up to five years in jail Mr Blatter, the former president of FIFA, football’s governing body, appears surprisingly sprightly. Mr Blatter stands accused of fraud, criminal mismanagement and forgery. Michel Platini, the former head of UEFA, the European wing of FIFA, is also on trial, charged with accepting a fraudulent payment of $2m authorised by Mr Blatter in 2011. Both men deny wrongdoing, maintaining that the fees were part of a “gentleman’s agreement”. Their verdicts are due on Friday.

Yet there was little gentlemanly about FIFA under Mr Blatter. In 2015 several of its high-ranking executives were arrested in Switzerland on corruption charges dating back two decades. And this year’s World Cup, to be held in Qatar in November, was tainted by allegations of bribery in the bidding process. After the verdicts, FIFA executives will at least be glad to see the focus return to the pitch rather than the courtroom.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which US state is separated into three “grand divisions”?

Thursday: Which city hosts the annual Nobel Prize awards?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Shankar Subramanian, Chennai, India

Katja Söhnlein, Cologne, Germany

Daniel Cossio, Cochabamba, Bolivia

Jane Gose, Kihei, Hawaii, USA

Andy Cayley, Bunbury, Western Australia

Don't forget things that were painful or embarrassing or silly. Turn them into a story that tells the truth

Paula Danziger
