The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (22:28 GMT+1 / 05:28 Hong Kong)

The leaders of the G7, a group of rich democracies, pledged their “undeterred and steadfast” financial and military support for Ukraine at an emergency meeting a day after a barrage of Russian missiles rained down on Ukrainian cities. In a joint statement the group warned of “severe consequences” if Russia were to deploy chemical, biological or nuclear weapons. Meanwhile NATO’s secretary-general, Jens Stoltenberg, said his organisation was “not seeing any changes” in Russia’s nuclear posture.

The IMF downgraded its forecast for global economic growth next year by 0.2 percentage points, to 2.7%. Blaming efforts to manage soaring inflation, Russia’s war in Ukraine and China’s slowdown, a report warned that a third of the global economy may tip into recession by next year. The forecast for 3.2% growth in 2022 remained unchanged.

President Joe Biden will “re-evaluate” America’s relationship with Saudi Arabia after the kingdom’s decision to reduce oil production, a White House official said. Last week the Saudi-led OPEC+ bloc of petroleum producers announced it would cut output by 2m barrels per day, despite sky-high prices. Mr Biden is reportedly considering retaliatory measures such as curbing arms sales and stripping OPEC members of immunity to American antitrust laws.

Israel and Lebanon struck an agreement to settle a maritime border dispute. While limited in scope, the US-brokered deal paves the way for offshore gas exploration in the eastern Mediterranean. Yair Lapid, the Israeli Prime Minister, called the deal “historic”. Hizbullah, an Iranian-backed Lebanese militia which threatened military escalation if the dispute was not resolved in Lebanon’s favour, reportedly backed the government’s position.

NASA said that its DART spacecraft had successfully altered the course of an asteroid—the first time in history that humanity has changed the direction of a celestial body. Last month the $330m satellite crashed into Dimorphos, a 160-metre-wide space rock, at 14,000mph (22,000km/h). It was the first test of NASA’s planetary defence system, which is designed to prevent asteroids colliding with, and potentially destroying, Earth.

The Bank of England widened its emergency bond-buying intervention to counter sell-offs by pension funds that threaten Britain’s financial stability. The scheme was introduced in response to the government’s reckless mini-budget. Separately, Britain’s unemployment rate fell to 3.5% in the quarter ending in August, its lowest level in nearly 50 years. Wages increased by 5.4% year on year, but continue to lag behind inflation.

China has ramped up anti-covid measures in some big cities ahead of the Communist Party’s five-yearly congress, which begins in Beijing on Sunday. To counter an uptick in infections after the National Day holiday Shanghai has locked down some neighbourhoods, closed entertainment venues and tourist attractions and will double the frequency of its mass testing. Other local authorities have closed schools.

49.7%, the estimated share of German companies that cannot secure enough skilled workers, up from 30% in 2019. Read the full story.

Asia’s leaders gather in Kazakhstan

PHOTO: REUTERS
Vladimir Putin, the Russian president waging war on Ukraine, is among the heads of state who will gather in Astana, Kazakhstan’s capital, on Wednesday. The leaders are meeting for the Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA), an international forum that ostensibly promotes peace and security in its region.

CICA’s 27 member states, which include China and India, cover much of the Middle East and Asia. Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Zhomart Tokayev, hopes to use this meeting to bolster CICA’s international relevance. As well as Mr Putin the presidents of ten other countries, including Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and Ebrahim Raisi of Iran, will attend.

The heads of some attending countries, including Mr Tokayev, are allies of Mr Putin, but sceptical of his war in Ukraine. Discussions of the conflict are thus likely to be shunted to the sidelines. Mr Putin may meet Mr Erdogan, who hopes to broker talks between Russia and the West. But the sight of one member state firing missiles at its smaller neighbour—Ukraine is one of CICA’s “observer” members—hardly inspires confidence in CICA’s peacebuilding mission.


Hong Kong’s “dim sum” bonds

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Thanks to China’s strict quarantine rules, few mainland tourists cross into semi-autonomous Hong Kong to sample the city’s delights, including its tasty dim sum restaurants serving small dishes and tea. But mainlanders are snapping up a different kind of Hong Kong fare: bonds denominated in the mainland’s currency but issued in the city’s international market, which stands outside China’s capital controls.

These securities, nicknamed “dim sum” bonds, are popular with mainland buyers because they offer slightly higher yields than equivalent onshore assets. And they are attractive to sellers because, thanks to rising interest rates in America, it is now cheaper to borrow in the yuan than in the dollar. China’s government will itself sell another 5.5bn-yuan ($770m) worth of bonds on Wednesday. As an international financial centre, Hong Kong benefits from this turnover. The sale thus serves two purposes. It helps the mainland by raising money for it. And it helps Hong Kong by raising money in it.

America’s contentious national monuments

PHOTO: ALAMY
On Wednesday President Joe Biden is expected to declare federal protection for the first “national monument” of his presidency, at Camp Hale high in Colorado’s Rocky Mountains. During the second world war, the army’s 10th Mountain Division learned to ski and rock climb there before being deployed to the European Alps. It will be the 159th area designated as such by a president.

The move is probably intended to boost Michael Bennet, a Democratic senator who has fought to preserve the site, before the midterm elections. It will also anger western Republicans, who view national monuments, on which activities such as drilling, mining, logging and grazing are restricted, as federal overreach. In August Republicans in Utah sued the Biden administration for rolling back Donald Trump’s decision to reduce in size two monuments there. If that case makes it to the Supreme Court, justices may consider the scope of the Antiquities Act, which allows presidents to designate vast monuments. Until then their number looks set to rise.

Sinn Féin’s vision for Ireland

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Wednesday evening Sinn Féin, a political party which wants the reunification of Ireland, will hold its inaugural People’s Assembly, in Belfast. The event is the first in its “Commission on the Future of Ireland” campaign to gather opinions from across the island.

Polls in Northern Ireland mostly show support for Irish unity far behind that for keeping Northern Ireland in the United Kingdom. In May, Sinn Féin became Northern Ireland’s largest political party—but still took just 29% of the vote. In the Republic of Ireland the party could do well enough in the next general election, in 2025, to lead the next governing coalition.

Despite this, and the party’s pledge that the commission will engage with Protestants, loyalists and unionists, Wednesday’s event is likely to see a few hundred republicans mostly talking to each other. Persuading voters to switch parties is hard. Getting them to switch countries is even harder. And for many people, on both sides of the border, Sinn Féin’s violent history makes the party off-putting.

Warhol’s copyright battle

PHOTO: REUTERS
A First Amendment creativity quarrel arrives at America’s Supreme Court on Wednesday. The case pits a photographer, Lynn Goldsmith, against the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts (AWF), which controls the late artist’s estate.

In 1981, Ms Goldsmith took a photograph of Prince, a musician. Three years later, Vanity Fair, a magazine, licensed the black-and-white image from Ms Goldsmith and commissioned Andy Warhol to use it as the basis of “Purple Prince”, a colourful screenprint. Warhol eventually made 16 “Prince” images in various colours. When Prince died in 2016, the AWF foundation licensed “Orange Prince” to Condé Nast, which owns Vanity Fair, without informing (or paying) Ms Goldsmith.

Allowing such appropriation, Ms Goldsmith says, amounts to “all copying, no right” and would “decimate creators’ livelihoods”. The foundation counters that Warhol’s prints pass the “transformativeness” test and fall under an exception to copyright known as “fair use”. A narrowing of this exemption would have implications for copyright throughout the art world.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which Motown singer was backed by the Miracles?
Tuesday: Which character is coach to Adonis Creed, in the boxing films “Creed” and “Creed II”?

If children are not introduced to music at an early age, I believe something fundamental is actually being taken from them.

Luciano Pavarotti
