The world in brief
July 3, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

France’s prime minister, Elisabeth Borne, warned rioters that the government will let “no violence go unpunished”. Ms Borne made the comment during a visit to L’Hay-les-Roses, south of Paris, where early on Sunday morning the home of the mayor was set on fire. At least 486 people were arrested on the fifth night of unrest. Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, postponed a three-day state visit to Germany. The violence was sparked by the killing by police of Nahel M, a teenager, during a traffic stop in a suburb of Paris on June 27th.

Poland will put 500 extra police along its border with Belarus amid increasing migrant crossings, as well as security worries over the Wagner Group of mercenaries. Wagner’s leader, Yevgeny Prigozhin, who led a mutinous march on Moscow on June 24th, was deported to Belarus. In 2021 Alexander Lukashenko, Belarus’s dictator, was accused of importing migrants and urging them to cross the border to destabilise the EU.

Russia resumed overnight drone attacks on Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, after a 12-day break. Ukraine’s air-defence systems destroyed all the approaching targets, according to the army. Meanwhile, experts in international law said that recent comments by Vladimir Putin—that the Wagner Group was “fully funded” by the Russian authorities—could make it easier to prosecute him for war crimes committed by the mercenaries.

Tesla delivered 466,140 vehicles in the second quarter of this year—a record, and above analysts’ expectations. Price cuts fuelled demand in China while American government subsidies for electric cars helped at home. The firm handed over 10% more vehicles than in the first quarter of this year, and 83% more than the same period in 2022.

Fighting intensified between Sudan’s army and the RSF, a paramilitary group, in the country’s capital, Khartoum, and the nearby city of Omdurman. The civil war—now in its twelfth week—has killed more than 3,000 people and displaced 2.5m. On Saturday the Sudanese Doctors Union accused the RSF of attacking one of the few hospitals still operating (the RSF denied the allegation).

Iran’s foreign minister, Hossein Amirabdollahian, said his country will delay sending an ambassador to Sweden in protest against the burning on Wednesday of a copy of the Koran outside a mosque in Stockholm. An Iraqi man living in Sweden has been arrested over the incident, which took place on the first day of Eid al-Adha, a Muslim festival.

Australian activists in favour of increasing indigenous representation in parliament held rallies in Sydney and other cities. A referendum later this year will ask whether Aboriginals should be included in the country’s constitution. The latest polls show declining support for the move, which is supported by the ruling Labor government, with just 49% of voters intending to vote “yes”.

Figure of the day: 38%, the proportion of households in Japan with just one person, up from 20% in 1980. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China’s cooling economy
Weeks of roasting temperatures in Beijing and elsewhere in northern China have raised the threat of drought and shortages of hydropower. That would add to the problems of China’s economy, which is far from sizzling. On Monday the purchasing managers’ indices, published by Caixin, a business magazine, are likely to show that China’s services industries lost momentum in June and its manufacturing activity remained weak. The property market is also flagging. Attention is now turning to the government’s response.

China’s central bank cut interest rates by a smidgen last month. The finance ministry also extended a tax break on electric vehicles. On June 29th the State Council, China’s cabinet, announced it would introduce new measures to support household consumption. Later this month, the Politburo, the policymaking committee of the Communist Party, may decide on more infrastructure spending. It will probably include more investment in China’s capacity to cope with an increasingly inhospitable climate.


The UN packs up in Mali
This week about 13,000 UN peacekeepers will begin withdrawing from Mali. Last month the country’s ruling junta demanded the blue helmets leave “without delay”. On Friday the UN Security Council voted to end the mission and withdraw by the end of the year.

The end of the decade-long peacekeeping mission will imperil a UN-backed peace deal between the government and Tuareg and Arab separatists. Yet a bigger threat is jihadists linked to Islamic State and al-Qaeda. Conflict with them has killed more than 10,000 people in Mali since 2016, and fighting across the region.

After it took power in a coup in 2020, the junta quarrelled with the UN and French forces involved in the fight. In 2021 it hired mercenaries from the Russian Wagner Group . Their arrival prompted France to leave; now America suggests that Wagner helped force out the UN, too. Yet Wagner’s future is now uncertain after its aborted mutiny against Russia’s army. The prospects for long-suffering Malians look grim.



PHOTO: AP
The EU woos Latin America
On Monday Argentina will host Mercosur, a South American trade group consisting of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, as well as six associated members including Chile. The bloc has growing clout.

Later this year the EU and Mercosur hope to ratify a long-planned free-trade agreement. Europe (and America) want to diversify supply chains away from China and Russia, and to source the minerals needed for the green transition. Over half of the world’s lithium, used in the batteries for electric cars, is found in Latin America. Brazil sits on huge reserves of nickel, graphite, manganese and rare-earth metals. But many governments want to increase state control over their commodities and favour producing higher value goods over exporting raw materials.

In June Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, visited the region and promised €10bn ($11bn) of investments. In July the leaders of more than 30 Latin American and Caribbean countries are invited to Brussels. With the EU’s net-zero commitments in the balance, the stakes are high.


PHOTO: AP
Ten unhappy years of Sisi
A decade ago Egyptians cheered when Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi took power in a military coup. He overthrew a democratically elected, but incompetent, Islamist president who had himself succeeded a general who had clung on to power for 30 years.

Mr Sisi promised much. Early on he guaranteed his people freedom of expression and vowed to invest in projects that would bring prosperity. But Mr Sisi is not a man of his word. The dictator has driven the economy into the ground. Food inflation is running at 60%; the Egyptian pound has lost five-sixths of its value against the dollar. And freedom of expression remains a dream. Mr Sisi locks up dissenters, and once vowed to “remove from the face of the earth” those who oppose him.

Egyptians are no longer cheering. In the privacy of their homes, they rail against him. Were it not for the fear of brutal reprisal, crowds may well have taken to the streets once more.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Can anyone stop Djokovic at Wimbledon?
The grand slams are tennis’s most prestigious tournaments because they are the most difficult to win. Yet Novak Djokovic makes the feat seem simple. Wimbledon begins on Monday but even before a ball had been struck bookies were giving the Serb a 64% chance of winning.

Those are the shortest odds for any player to win a grand slam in 13 years—and for good reason. Mr Djokovic is on a 28-match winning streak at Wimbledon and has captured the past four men’s singles titles there. Last month he won the French Open, his 23rd grand slam, the most won by any man.

Mr Djokovic’s opponents, such as Carlos Alcaraz, the world’'s top-ranked player, will hope that ending his winning streak may break his competitive focus. But Mr Djokovic is brazen about his desire to make history. This year’s Wimbledon provides another opportunity: a win would be his eighth, equalling the record set by his former rival, Roger Federer. The possibility of beating that record would surely spur him on even further.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Apart from Abigail Adams, who was the only woman to be the wife of one US President and mother of another?

Whoever controls the media, controls the mind.

Jim Morrison
