The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 7, 2023

Large earthquakes struck southern Turkey and Syria, killing more than 3,400 people and trapping many more under collapsed buildings. The initial quake’s epicentre was near the Turkish city of Gaziantep and had a magnitude of 7.8. Hours later an aftershock of similar magnitude hit further north. These were the strongest earthquakes in the region since one near Istanbul in 1999 that killed over 17,000 people.

Russia’s government said its budget deficit rose to 1.76trn roubles ($25bn) in January. Revenues from oil-and-gas sales nearly halved from the same period a year ago to 426bn roubles, while defence spending pushed government outlays up by 59% year on year, to 3.1trn roubles. Western sanctions mean that Russian crude trades at about $50 a barrel, compared with $80 for Brent.

The Pentagon said it had failed to detect previous Chinese surveillance balloons in American airspace, discovering them only later through “additional means of [intelligence] collection”. General Glen VanHerck called it an “awareness gap that we have to figure out”. At least four other intrusions had occurred in recent years before last month’s. America said it would not return the debris from the destroyed balloon to China.

Hundreds of protesters took to the streets in Delhi and other Indian cities amid growing calls to investigate allegations of fraud against the Adani Group, an Indian conglomerate. Many demonstrators were associated with the Congress, India’s main opposition party. Around $110bn was wiped from the market value of the group’s firms after Hindenburg Research, an American short-seller, made the allegations on January 24th.

The UN warned that about 1m Tibetan children have been sent to Chinese boarding schools seemingly under a government policy to assimilate them into majority Han culture. Instruction is only in Mandarin, making it difficult for Tibetan children to communicate with family in their native language and contributing to the “erosion” of their identity, said three UN special rapporteurs.

The Premier League accused Manchester City, one of the football competition’s most successful teams in recent years, of more than 100 breaches of its financial rules. The investigation said the club failed to provide accurate information about its revenues and flouted “financial fair play” rules, which limit a club’s permitted losses. Since its takeover by Abu Dhabi United Group in 2008, Manchester city has spent more than €2.1bn on players.

The Rothschild family (who own a stake in The Economist) announced plans to take its investment bank, Rothschild & Co, off the Paris stockmarket. Concordia, the family’s holding company, owns about 40% of the bank. It plans to offer €48 ($52) a share for the shares that it does not already own, a 19% premium on the price when markets closed on Friday.

Correction: In Sunday’s edition we incorrectly wrote that Juba is the capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo, in fact that is Kinshasa. Sorry.

Fact of the day: 2.2%, the contraction of Russia’s GDP last year, which defied many economists’ expectations of an annual decline of 10% or more. Read the full story.

Poor construction makes earthquakes more deadly

PHOTO: REUTERS
The huge earthquakes that struck southern Turkey and northern Syria on Monday killed more than 3,400 people. They were the strongest in the region since one near Istanbul in 1999 that killed over 17,000 people. That disaster, and botched search-and-rescue efforts, exposed a deeply flawed urban development model, corrupt building practices and lack of preparedness in Turkey. Some problems persist.

Under Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, in power since 2003, disaster response has improved. Over 3m housing units have been renovated and strengthened. Yet apartment blocks built on the cheap or in defiance of building codes continue to crowd Turkish cities and towns. An amnesty on unregistered construction work, passed by Mr Erdogan’s government in 2018 and which has had 9m applications, has not helped. It risked turning Turkish cities into “graveyards” in an earthquake, Cemal Gokce, the chairman of the Chamber of Civil Engineers, said a year later. His words may have proved prescient.


Biden’s state of the union

PHOTO: REUTERS
President Joe Biden will deliver the annual state-of-the-union address to Congress on Tuesday. With Republicans in control of the House of Representatives, Mr Biden’s window for passing big-ticket legislation has closed. So instead of laying out a bold agenda, his speech will trumpet his policy wins to date.

In preparation for a re-election bid next year—expected to be announced soon—the president will probably remind Americans of his job-creation efforts and major infrastructure and climate bills. Foreign policy will no doubt also feature prominently. Concerns about China are fresh in American minds after the shooting down of a Chinese balloon that was detected flying over sensitive military sites. And support for Ukraine remains high on the agenda ahead of the anniversary of Russia’s invasion on February 24th. Still, Mr Biden will know that some will scrutinise the delivery of his speech as much as its substance. His age (80) remains a major concern for voters looking to 2024.

How is big oil spending its profit bonanza?

PHOTO: DREAMSTIME
The coffers of big oil companies are overflowing. So far this year Shell unveiled net profits for 2022 of nearly $40bn; during the same period ExxonMobil made a record net profit of $55.7bn and Chevron’s doubled. BP will add to the haul on Tuesday and TotalEnergies will do so on Wednesday. In total the five oil “supermajors” may have raked in around $200bn in profits.

Some of this bounty will flow back to shareholders, but a wedge will be invested. Where and how that money is spent is changing. Bosses need energy that is faster to market, less risky to develop, cleaner to produce and closer to home. Having been forced to abandon their assets in Russia after the invasion of Ukraine, some are diverting investments to the Americas, a region with relatively low-risk and low-cost reserves. Oil companies are also responding to pressure from activists and policymakers to decarbonise their portfolios. BP, for instance, vows to spend 40% of its capital expenditure budget on low-carbon projects by 2025.

Australia’s next interest-rate rise

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Battling rising prices, Australian central bankers have raised interest rates eight times since May. Their fight is not yet over. Inflation has been slower to ease down under than in Europe and America; in December it hit an annual rate of 7.8%, the highest since 1990. The Reserve Bank of Australia responded by bumping up interest rates by another 0.25 percentage points on Tuesday, to 3.35%. It has not hit those heights since September 2012.

But it may then be forced to change tack. Australia has some of the world’s most indebted households, and the hikes are starting to hurt. The bank’s rates rise means it will cost Aussies almost A$1,000 ($692) more per month to service a A$500,000 mortgage than it did last April, according to AMP, an Australian bank. Since then house prices have plunged by almost 9%. And more will suffer this year as their fixed-rate loans end. To avoid a recession, monetary policymakers may soon have to pull their punches.

A landmark art show in the Gulf

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Sharjah Biennial in the United Arab Emirates opens on Tuesday to mark 30 years since the event’s founding. The contemporary-art exhibition has always punched above its weight thanks to the ambition of Sharjah’s ruling family, who are keen curators and collectors. Still, this year’s iteration is hotly anticipated—and poignant. Its focus was conceived by Okwui Enwezor (pictured), a Nigerian curator who died of cancer in 2019. During his lifetime Mr Enwezor did more than almost any other curator to shape the way the contemporary-art world thinks about history and colonialism.

Those themes underpin the show, which is titled “Thinking Historically in the Present” and curated by Hoor Al Qasimi, director of the Sharjah Art Foundation. In five towns across the emirate, the event will display new work by an array of artists. They include Wangechi Mutu, a Kenyan-American painter and sculptor; Steve McQueen, a British film-maker; Philippe Parreno, a French conceptual artist; and Sir John Akomfrah, a Ghanaian-born British artist and director. For lovers of contemporary art it promises to be worth a trip.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Please note, the way we choose winners has changed. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which 1952 western stars Gary Cooper as a marshal who must face a gang of killers on his own?

Monday: Which band, which had their greatest success in the 1980s, had hits with “Something About You” and “Lessons in Love”?

Science makes no pretension to eternal truth or absolute truth.

Eric Temple Bell
