The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (21:57 GMT+1 / 04:57 Hong Kong)

America’s Supreme Court overturned Roe v Wade, the landmark ruling from 1973 that protected the right to an abortion. At least 25 states are expected to severely restrict or completely ban the practice, including, in some instances, in cases of rape or incest. It is the most consequential ruling by the Court in recent history, affecting tens of millions of women. President Joe Biden called the court’s decision a “tragic error”.

Meanwhile, several companies vowed to cover expenses for employees who need to travel for an abortion. JP Morgan Chase and Disney joined Citigroup, Apple and other firms that previously announced similar policies. While Republican-led states move to ban abortion, some liberal ones are bolstering their support: Oregon allocated funding to an abortion charity and Illinois’ legislature will hold a special session to “further enshrine” reproductive rights.

Russia warned that there would be “negative consequences” for the European Union accepting Ukraine and Moldova as candidates for membership to the bloc. A spokeswoman for Russia’s foreign ministry said the EU’s potential expansion (which would take years if it did happen) was tantamount to the “political and economic enslavement of its neighbours”. Meanwhile, Ukrainian forces in Severodonetsk were told to withdraw, after withstanding months of Russian shelling.

The International Monetary Fund slashed its economic growth forecast for America due to the Federal Reserve’s swift increase in interest rates. The IMF estimated that America’s economy would grow by 2.9% in 2022, down from its 3.7% forecast in April. Kristalina Georgieva, the organisation’s boss, said there is a “narrowing path” to the country avoiding a recession.

The UN’s office for human rights concluded that Israeli security forces shot dead Shireen Abu Aqleh. The journalist for Al Jazeera was killed on May 11th while reporting on an Israeli security operation in the occupied West Bank. Initially some, including the Israeli authorities, blamed armed Palestinians for her death.

A former leader of Britain’s Conservative Party, Michael Howard, said Boris Johnson should resign after the party lost two parliamentary seats in by-elections. The results raise new questions about the prime minister’s future. The party chairman, Oliver Dowden, resigned soon after the results were in.

Toyota, a Japanese carmaker, is recalling 2,700 of its first all-electric vehicles due to problems with the wheels—they may fall off. According to the company, this may “result in a loss of vehicle control.” The recall covers the bZ4X SUV, sold in America, Europe and Japan. It was launched in Japan only last month.

Word of the week: Garimpeiros, wildcat miners in the Brazilian rainforests, among those groups most against any environmental protection of the forests

Roe’s last stand

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Friday, America’s Supreme Court overturned Roe v Wade, the ruling from 1973 that declared a constitutional right to abortion. For months America’s anti-abortionists had prayed that their half-century of activism would pay off, while abortion providers prepared for a post-Roe future. It has now arrived.

Decisions on abortion now return to the states. Around half are expected to ban it. Many conservative states have already passed restrictions that had hollowed out Roe. Yet the sudden disappearance of abortion provision across vast swathes of America will still cause unprecedented trouble. Women who need abortions will have to travel further. The burden will fall most heavily on the poor. Anti-abortion activists will shift their protests to clinics in progressive states, where abortion will remain legal. Efforts will be made to pass a national ban. Far from being over, America’s long abortion war is entering a new phase.

Bridging a gap in Bangladesh

PHOTO: PA
On Saturday Bangladesh unveils its biggest public infrastructure project since independence in 1971. The 6.2km Padma bridge spans the main distributary of the Ganges, connecting 30m people in South Asia to the megapolis of Dhaka. The inauguration of a project some 23 years in the works is a public-relations prize for Sheikh Hasina, the prime minister. In 2012 a tussle over corruption led the World Bank to pull a record $1.2bn in cheap loans from the project. One decade later, the $3.5bn bridge has been completed by Chinese state-backed companies, and fully financed by the Bangladeshi treasury.

The trussed four-lane highway and rail route will cut travel times between the east and west of Bangladesh. That could boost annual GDP growth by 0.3 percentage points, according to Copenhagen Consensus, an American think-tank. Yet greater potential payoffs may go untapped. Bangladesh’s borders with Myanmar and India remain largely closed; trade and neighbourly trust are low. To achieve greater regional integration, no smaller feat of political engineering will be needed.

Friends at first sniff

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
People tend to be less open about sniffing each other than dogs. But new evidence suggests that odour is a good predictor of whether strangers will click. Inbal Ravreby, Kobi Snitz and Noam Sobel of the Weizmann Institute of Science, in Israel, claim to have shown that friends smell alike. In a paper recently published in Science Advances the scientists use both an electronic nose and human sniffers to test the odours for a (admittedly small) group of 20 pairs of established, platonic, same-sex friends. They find that buddies matched.

Does friendship cause odours to converge, or do pre-existing scented similarities lead to friendship? The researchers’ findings show that the latter is more likely: they were able to use the e-nose measurements to correctly predict mutual self-reported feelings of immediate friendship between strangers 77% of the time. Somehow, the nose knows.

Talking in a hotspot

PHOTO: AFP
The discussions at the biennial Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting are usually remarkably dull. But excitement often abounds elsewhere: in controversies surrounding its hosts. The 2013 summit was held in Sri Lanka, which has a record of war crimes and torture, causing countries including Canada and India to boycott it. Eyebrows were also raised when the meeting took place in the Bahamas, whose government at the time was allegedly linked to drug smugglers, or Zambia, then near the front lines of Zimbabwe’s war of liberation.

So too will be the case this year, as the CHOGM is hosted by Rwanda; heads of government meet on Saturday. The African country is under fresh scrutiny for its record on human rights because of a British plan to deport asylum-seekers to it. It is also accused of backing rebels in neighbouring Congo. Both issues will probably dominate the discussion—to the detriment of the meeting’s stated aims of boosting trade and innovation.

Weekend profile: Emily Eavis, the Glastonbury heiress

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
In 1999 the 19-year-old Emily Eavis was training to be a teacher in London when her mother, Jean, fell ill. She returned home to Somerset to support Jean and Michael, her father, on the family’s dairy farm. Tragically Jean died while the couple was tending to the family’s other business—the Glastonbury festival, which they had run for nearly 30 years. This weekend Emily is in charge of the (pandemic-delayed) 50th-anniversary festival—which will attract over 200,000 revellers to Worthy Farm.

In 1970 Michael Eavis, along with Jean and some friends, decided to put on a music festival. In the 1980s Glastonbury (named after a nearby town) became a near-annual event. As a child Emily dreamed of having ordinary parents and fewer people camping in what was, in effect, her back garden. Some years were wild: she remembers riots on site in 1990, and being shouted at in public by local landowners irritated by the crowds.

Mr Eavis thrived on the risks of running a music festival, while his wife was a nurturer, tending to spaced-out campers in the family’s farmhouse. Ms Eavis takes after both of them. Yet she never assumed that Glasto was her birthright. After deciding to help with the family business when her mother died, she began an apprenticeship of sorts in London. Organising charity gigs with the likes of Coldplay and REM taught her how to persuade massive bands to play for fractions of their usual fees, a practice for which Glastonbury is well known. Gradually she and her husband, Nick Dewey, a band manager, assumed bigger roles at the festival. A highlight was the launch, in 2007, of The Park, an intimate space at Glastonbury known for surreal art and spontaneous performances.

The 86-year-old Mr Eavis marked the start of this year’s festival on Wednesday by opening the gates. (He also still deals with neighbours.) But these days his daughter and son-in-law run the event and book the bands. Judging by Glastonbury’s enduring success in an era of proliferating festivals, they do a fine job: tickets are like gold dust. (The festival costs £40m, or $49m, to put on; around £2m of the profits go to charity.) Despite its continual expansion, Ms Eavis has made the festival greener, safer and cleaner than ever. Even the burger vans of old have been usurped by fancy cuisines usually to be found on the high streets of English cities.

Ms Eavis’s musical choices face more scrutiny than her father’s ever did. But despite some grumbles (in 2015 many festival-goers were furious when she booked Kanye West, a hip-hop artist) she has remained broadly loyal to Glastonbury’s traditions. The Eavis family has always had catholic tastes, ranging across pop, folk, blues, rock and dance. And Glasto’s success has enabled the festival to cater for all of them: over five days this weekend the punters at Glastonbury will watch more than 3,000 artists perform on over 100 stages, from Paul McCartney to a Ukrainian folk quartet. Keeping them happy is a full-time job.

The winners of this week’s quiz

PHOTO: PA
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Masnoon Bujang, Kuching, Malaysia

North America: Joel High, Silverthorne, United States

Central and South America: Gerardo Garnica, Mexico City, Mexico

Europe: Ian Bassford, London, United Kingdom

Africa: Nils Pearce, KwaDukuza, South Africa

Oceania: Max Yuao Li, Christchurch, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of Carrie Fisher, Stand By Your Man, Salem, the misery index and Shining Path. The theme is Stephen King novels.

Weekly crossword

Welcome to our new crossword, designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers:

Cryptic clues

1 down Furious voters go up at former guerrilla (7,5)

1 across Where to hear “You’re the one that I want”? (6)

2 across Cases of Verdi and Rameau sneezing first? It’s catching (5)

3 across Passed over backwards, partly on the Black Sea (6)

Factual clues

1 down Once a member of M-19 (7,5)

1 across Country berated by EU leaders at summits a decade ago (6)

2 across Part of a British collection behind razor-wire in Colindale? (5)

3 across Airport in the heart of the Permian basin (6)

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent in Friday's edition.


If no one is corrupt, no one will be poor.

Benigno Aquino III
