The world in brief
September 7, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

America pledged additional security aid for Ukraine worth $175m. The announcement came as Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, visited Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, for the third time since the war began. In the eastern city of Kostiantynivka, meanwhile, Russian shelling killed at least 16 people and injured many more, according to Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president. Mr Zelensky called the Russians “terrorists” and said that the death toll from the strike could yet rise.

Mexico’s Supreme Court decriminalised abortion across the country, two years after it struck down criminal penalties for the procedure in the northern state of Coahuila. The earlier ruling set a precedent nationwide, though many of Mexico’s 32 states—most of which had, until now, outright bans on abortion—were yet to act on it. Mexico joins a small but growing contingent of Latin American countries that have relaxed restrictions.

The EU announced that six tech companies—including Alphabet, Google’s parent company, Amazon and Apple—will be considered “gatekeepers” under the new Digital Markets Act. The designation means they will be subject to additional antitrust regulations. The DMA enforces stricter competition rules on big tech firms in a bid to curb their dominance and promote startup innovation.

A Nigerian appeals court rejected petitions to overturn President Bola Tinubu’s election victory from February. The petitions, brought by opposition parties, accused the election commission of being marred by irregularities and alleged that Mr Tinubu was not qualified to run. The opposition previously suggested that protests could erupt if the court dismissed the petitions.

Poland’s central bank cut its benchmark interest rate by 0.75 percentage points to 6%—confounding markets, which had predicted a 0.25 percentage decrease. Poland has yet to tame inflation; its annual rate was 10.1% in August. Some economists accused the bank of cutting rates to stimulate Poland’s economy and boost the ruling party ahead of a general election in October.

The past three months have been the hottest ever measured, according to the Copernicus Climate Change Service, an EU-funded programme. Last month was the warmest August on record—and the second hottest month ever after July 2023—with temperatures an estimated 1.5°C above preindustrial averages. In August sea-surface temperatures also hit 20.98°C, their highest monthly average.

Harvard was named the worst university for free speech in America by the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, a pro-speech outfit. The university scored 0 out of 100 in their rankings, which were based on a sample of 55,000 undergraduates across the country. The report said that campaigns to disinvite speakers contributed to an “abysmal” speech environment.

Figure of the day: $510trn, the world’s wealth in 2020—up from $160trn in 2000. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Good news for China’s economy?
An impressive export boom helped China’s economy weather the pandemic. Now that the country’s growth is faltering again, some worry it will try to export its way out of trouble by deliberately devaluing the yuan. That seems unlikely. China has kept its currency fairly stable on a trade-weighted basis and is keen to avoid the kind of destabilising capital outflows that followed its clumsy devaluation in 2015.

Nonetheless, hopes are rising that China’s exports may be close to bottoming out. The global economy has not been as weak as feared. China’s shipments to Asia, Latin America and Africa have also proved more resilient this year than its sales to America. Figures released later on Thursday may show that China’s exports grew in dollar terms in August compared with the previous month, even if they were still much lower than a year earlier. That would represent a rare piece of good news amid the China gloom.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Britain is losing its way in cutting carbon
To the east of Britain lies the windy North Sea. Sailors have battled the gusts for around 2,000 years. More recently, Britain has harnessed them in another way: building offshore wind turbines. Geographical blessing was aided by clever policy, such as “contracts for difference”, which guaranteed investors’ returns and drove down costs rapidly Last year, offshore turbines—some of which stand over 300 metres tall—provided around one-seventh of Britain’s electricity. Only China has installed more.

There are concerns, however, about the latest renewable-energy auction, the results of which are expected from Thursday. In contrast to previous rounds, few if any offshore wind projects are expected to win contracts. Developers blame the government for not increasing its maximum strike price—the highest bid allowed to developers in a reverse auction—in line with spiralling building costs. With other wealthy countries competing for the steel and vessels needed to erect turbines, a hiatus could knock the wind out of a British success story.



PHOTO: REUTERS
“Ghost guns” are back in court
A clash resumes on Thursday over “ghost guns”—kits for building untraceable weapons. The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals will consider whether a judge in Texas was right to block a rule, imposed last year by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, that subjects ghost guns to the same regulations as conventional firearms.

The plaintiffs—a ghost-gun producer and gun-rights advocates—claim law-abiding citizens should be free to make firearms for their own use. They say the ATF’s rule undermines a practice that has persisted “since the earliest colonial days”.

The government condemns this as inconsistent with the law—and “common sense”. It likens the regulation to those governing flat-pack furniture: it is obvious that a tax on sales of bookshelves would also apply to boxes of parts and tools for self-assembly. To conclude otherwise for ready-to-assemble guns “makes a mockery of Congress’s careful regulatory scheme”. The Supreme Court, which temporarily reinstated the ghost-gun regulations in August, will probably have the last word.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Strikes loom at Chevron’s Australian gas plants
Picket lines may soon go up at two of Chevron’s biggest liquefied natural gas projects in Australia, Gorgon and Wheatstone. Talk of industrial action emerged after Offshore Alliance, a union, spurned a recent pay proposal. The union threatened to cost the supermajor billions of dollars: the plants made nearly $7bn last year, almost a fifth of Chevron’s total profit. A strike planned for Thursday has been delayed by at least a day, while the two sides negotiate.

Any strike would squeeze gas markets too. The facilities accounted for close to 7% of global LNG supply last year. A prolonged shutdown could bring its contribution offline. When news of potential strikes first broke in early August, European natural-gas prices shot up by almost 40%.

Chevron has assuaged investors’ fears for the moment. It says it can run the facilities with a skeleton crew for many months. Moreover, European storage is brimming with gas, helping soften prices. But that may change if workers hold the line.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Who will win the Mercury prize?
The problem with the Mercury prize—an annual award for the best album by a British or Irish act, to be announced on Thursday—is that it pits against each other very different kinds of music. The year’s shortlist, drawn up by a panel of independent experts from a variety of music backgrounds, comprises 12 albums. Their creators include little known, critically acclaimed acts alongside socially conscious hip-hop performers and superstar rock bands like the Arctic Monkeys. As usual, there are folk and jazz nominees, such as Lankum and Ezra Collective.

The acts that do not make the shortlist often say as much about the accolade as those that do. This year there was no room for Ed Sheeran and Sam Smith, demonstrating that the arbiters are prepared to snub chart-toppers. Trying to guess the winner is a fool’s errand given the variety of genres on display. “Hugo” by Loyle Carner (pictured), a hip-hop artist, is the bookies’ favourite.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which drummer from the rock band Genesis went on to have a successful solo singing career?

Wednesday: What three-word phrase is often used by conservatives as an insult to President Joe Biden?

Brass shines as fair to the ignorant as gold to the goldsmiths.

Queen Elizabeth I
