The world in brief
 March 23, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The Federal Reserve raised its benchmark interest rate by a quarter-percentage point, bringing it to a range of 4.75%-5%. Rate-setters now think that there will be one more quarter-point raise before the end of the year. The S&P 500 shed nearly 1.7% after Jerome Powell, chair of the central bank, said an interest-rate cut was not part of his “baseline expectation” this year.

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, visited frontline positions near Bakhmut, a town in eastern Ukraine which has been battered by intense fighting in recent months. Mr Zelensky thanked soldiers “for protecting the sovereignty of our country”. Meanwhile, Russia launched a flurry of drone attacks on several Ukrainian cities, killing at least four people.

In a three-hour grilling before a committee of MPs, Boris Johnson denied that he had lied over the “partygate” scandal. Mr Johnson testily defended himself against allegations that while in office he misled the House of Commons in his account of several boozy gatherings—which he characterised as “essential” work events—during the pandemic lockdown. The committee will issue a verdict by summer.

PacWest, a mid-sized American bank, said that it had raised $1.4bn in cash, after it announced that customers had pulled 20% of their deposits since the beginning of this year. Stocks in its parent company, PacWest Bancorp, fell at the announcement. The bank is one of several West Coast lenders to be hit by increased outflows after the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank.

Hundreds of protesters gathered in Beirut, Lebanon’s capital, to decry worsening economic conditions. Riot police fired tear gas to disperse crowds, which were mostly made up of retired soldiers demanding better pay. The Lebanese pound recently plunged to a new low of 100,000 to the dollar. Banks have curtailed people’s access to their savings accounts; some have tried to withdraw their own money by force.

In a televised interview, Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, said that his controversial but much-needed pension reform plans would be enacted by the end of the year, pending approval by the Constitutional Council. The decision to force through the reforms without parliamentary approval sparked outrage across the country, with thousands gathering in protest.

Pervin Buldan, co-chair of the Kurdish-rooted People’s Democratic Party, the third-biggest in Turkey’s parliament, said that her party would not nominate a presidential candidate in the upcoming elections. Ms Buldan did not explicitly endorse Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the opposition candidate, but the move will bolster his chances of defeating President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in the vote, scheduled for May 14th.

Fact of the day: 42%, the percentage of people in North Korea that were malnourished between 2019 and 2021, according to the UN. Read the full story.

Correction: In yesterday’s World in Brief we inaccurately characterised the Danish politician who burned a Koran in Stockholm in January as a member of Denmark’s parliament. In fact Rasmus Paludan does not hold elected office.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Congress grills TikTok’s CEO
On Thursday Shou Zi Chew, the boss of TikTok, will face a grilling before members of America’s House of Representatives. The questions will largely focus on national security. TikTok is owned by ByteDance, a Chinese company headquartered in Beijing, and so subject to the influence of the Chinese Communist Party. Critics say the party could use the video-sharing app to spread propaganda or gain access to user data. (TikTok denies the allegations.)

Earlier this month President Joe Biden warned ByteDance that it must sell TikTok or risk a ban; the app is already barred from many government-issued devices in America. Donald Trump tried to enact a total ban on the app’s use in 2020, but the courts struck it down. Bipartisan concerns continue to grow. And TikTok has soared in popularity. In a video posted on Tuesday Mr Chew said he was “super excited” to announce that TikTok had 150m American users.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Pakistan’s multiple crises
On Thursday Pakistan commemorates the Lahore Resolution of 1940, which paved the way for Pakistan’s creation seven years later. But this year the national holiday is marred by multiple crises. Provincial elections in Punjab, Pakistan’s political centre of gravity, are scheduled for April 30th. Yet the federal government, led by Shehbaz Sharif, wants to delay the vote. It wants Imran Khan, who was deposed as prime minister in April, arrested—potentially disqualifying him from contesting elections.

Meanwhile, Pakistan seems unable to shake off the spectre of default. The country is hoping to unlock $1.1bn in a bail-out programme with the IMF, agreed in 2019 but long stalled. The government’s failure to tell the lender about its plans to introduce fuel subsidies was the latest hiccup. If all that were not enough, the Pakistani Taliban is resurgent. On Tuesday militants killed a senior Pakistan intelligence officer in a firefight along the Afghan border. Pakistan’s people have little to celebrate.


PHOTO: EPA
EU leaders gather in Brussels
On Thursday the European Union’s 27 national leaders will begin two days of meetings to hash out compromises on security, the economy and environmental rules. Ukraine will feature heavily, with President Volodymyr Zelensky joining virtually. The leaders will discuss how to increase help for his country, for example by donating more weapons or accelerating Ukraine’s accession to the EU.

But other headaches abound. One is how to respond to America’s green subsidies, which some fear will redirect investment away from Europe. Another is a spat over internal-combustion engines: the EU had agreed to end production by 2035, but then Germany, the bloc’s biggest economy, raised a last-minute objection. Meanwhile, southern Europe wants to highlight its problems in handling a recent influx of migrants. And leaders of the 20 euro-zone countries, who meet separately on Friday, must face banking turmoil of the sort that usually ends up roiling the region.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
The Bank of England tackles surging prices
Inflation in Britain unexpectedly rose in February, according to figures released on Wednesday. Economists had forecast a drop in the annual rate to below double digits, for the first time since August 2022. But a surge in food prices helped lift inflation to 10.4%, up from 10.1% in January.

That will make the Bank of England’s interest-rate decision on Thursday easier. Like other central banks, the BOE has seen its battle against inflation complicated by the financial turmoil that followed the run on Silicon Valley Bank in America. That showed how increasing interest rates to combat inflation can cause chaos in the banking sector.

Before the new inflation data, markets had judged that the bank would either leave rates unchanged, or raise them by a quarter-percentage point. Now the latter is far more likely.



PHOTO: TODD ROSENBERG /COURTESY OF CHIC
Alan Turing’s story told as an opera
A computer scientist and wartime codebreaker, Alan Turing has come to be regarded as one of Britain’s great tragic heroes. He was already the subject of “The Imitation Game”, a film starring Benedict Cumberbatch that was released in 2014. Now Turing’s story will be told as an opera. “The Life and Death(s) of Alan Turing” has its world premiere at the Chicago Opera Theatre on Thursday, with Jonathan Michie, an American baritone, in the title role.

The drama focuses on the awful toll that homophobia took on the mathematical genius’s life. After he was charged with gross indecency in 1952, Turing underwent chemical castration to avoid imprisonment. Two years later he died of cyanide poisoning in a possible suicide. Turing was finally pardoned by Queen Elizabeth II in 2013, following a public campaign. Decades after his death, his contribution to society, and tragic fate, are properly remembered at last.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Thursday: Which alternative name for England stems from the Latin word for “white”?

Wednesday: What chocolate cake, with a cherry filling, shares its name with an area of Germany?

Nothing is more responsible for the good old days than a bad memory.

Franklin P. Adams
