The world in brief July 6, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 00:35 GMT+1 / 07:35 Hong Kong

Britain’s chancellor and health secretary resigned, throwing the government of Boris Johnson, the prime minister, into disarray. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said he had lost confidence in Mr Johnson, who has been engulfed in repeated scandals, most recently over the drunken conduct of a senior government figure. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, said the public expected a government run “properly, competently and seriously”, and hinted at differences with Mr Johnson over fiscal policy.

Oil prices slid amid concerns that a looming economic slowdown will weaken demand. The price of a barrel of Brent crude, the international benchmark, dipped by about 10%, to $102.77. Just weeks ago it was around $120, as boycotts of Russian oil sparked fears of supply shortages. Meanwhile, recession worries in Europe sent the euro to its lowest level against the dollar in two decades. And yields on the ten-year Treasury note fell below those of the two-year bond for the third time this year. Such yield-curve inversions tend to precede recessions.

Russia’s parliament approved two new bills that will in effect move the country’s economy onto a war footing. The first could force businesses to supply the army with goods and services, the second could compel employees of those businesses to work anti-social hours and without annual leave. Both laws require second and third readings and the signature of Vladimir Putin, the president, to become law.

Police said the 21-year-old gunman who attacked a Fourth of July parade in Highland Park, Illinois fired more than 70 rounds from a roof, then initially evaded capture by blending into the crowd dressed as a woman. Seven people have died; more than 30 were injured. Officials said the suspect planned the shooting for weeks and legally purchased the gun he used.

The Bank of England warned that the economic outlook for Britain, and the world, has “deteriorated materially”. Inflationary pressures, largely created by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, are straining household and business finances. The bank predicts that global markets will experience more turbulence, and has told British banks to set aside more cash to absorb future shocks.

Brittney Griner, an American basketball player held in Russia, appealed to Joe Biden, America’s president, for help. Ms Griner was arrested in February when airport security allegedly found vape cartridges containing cannabis oil in her luggage. “I’m terrified I might be here forever,” she wrote in a letter delivered to government officials. American authorities said they are “using every available means” to help her.

Italy declared a state of emergency in five northern regions in response to the area’s worst drought in 70 years. The drought threatens over 30% of Italy’s agricultural production. Several municipalities have also set restrictions on water usage. The announcement came after a glacier collapsed in the Italian alps, killing seven, as the result of unusually high temperatures.

Fact of the day: 51, the number of people killed in mass shootings in America so far this year. 


A global food catastrophe is still coming
As well as war, disease and poverty, hunger is haunting the world. Expect sobering findings from the UN’s annual “State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World” report, which is published on Wednesday. Covid-19 has warped supply chains and curbed household incomes, and extreme weather has hurt yields in many breadbaskets. The result was a jump in the number of undernourished people in 2021.

Yet this year threatens to be worse. International grain prices, which shot up after Russia invaded Ukraine, have at least fallen to pre-war levels. But the UN’s negotiations with Russia to end a blockade on Ukraine’s shipping of grain have failed to bear fruit. And many risks remain, from protectionism and more adverse weather events to the soaring costs of energy and fertilisers. In May the UN warned that the number of people facing acute hunger could rise by 47m in 2022, bringing the total to nearly 250m. That forecast still looks tragically credible.

Biden mulls a cut in tariffs on China
On July 6th 2018 Donald Trump’s first long list of tariffs on Chinese products took effect. That matters, because America is required to review the levies after four years. With inflation running high Joe Biden, Mr Trump’s successor as president, is looking for ways to ease price pressures. Eliminating tariffs on China—effectively, a tax on consumers—could lower inflation by roughly half a percentage point, according to some estimates.

But Mr Biden has also vowed to be tough on China, and is loth to do something that would be portrayed by Republicans as a capitulation. Even within his administration, some see the tariffs as precious leverage. The result may be a narrow suspension of tariffs on school supplies, which are popular summer purchases, and the like, while the rest remain in place. For Mr Biden, this could be the worst of all worlds: he risks criticism for making concessions, while inflation remains resolutely untamed.

Boris on the brink
Britain’s prime minister has been under threat for so long that it has become difficult to imagine what would dislodge him. But the simultaneous resignations of two of his government’s most senior ministers—Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the exchequer, and Sajid Javid, the health secretary—have left Boris Johnson more exposed than ever. Mr Sunak cited fundamental differences with the prime minister over economic policy, Mr Javid the need for competence and integrity. Both quit in the wake of revelations that Mr Johnson knew of previous allegations against the former deputy chief whip, who resigned last week following accusations that he drunkenly groped two men.

Mr Johnson will desperately try to shore up support among Tory MPs. But cabinet loyalty is now a thing of the past, opponents are co-ordinating and recent by-election results signal how low his stock has sunk with voters. His survival in a confidence vote last month makes him technically safe until and unless Tory MPs change the rules on holding another ballot. But the game is well and truly afoot.

DACA on the docket

PHOTO: AP
Ten years ago America instituted a programme to block immigrants who had been illegally brought into America as children from deportation. The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) scheme allowed beneficiaries to apply for work authorisation, renewable every two years. DACA was supposed to be a temporary reprieve while Congress passed legislation offering undocumented arrivals a path to full citizenship. But it never did.

Though popular—three-quarters of Americans support it—DACA has long been under attack. Although the Supreme Court thwarted Donald Trump’s bid to end it, in 2018 Texas and other Republican-led states sued to stop the federal government from approving new enrollees. Last year a judge sided with Texas. On Wednesday the conservative Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals will hear the Biden administration’s appeal against that decision. Some 650,000 people currently benefit from DACA, and 100,000 more a year could enrol if allowed to. Instead, those young people face the possibility of deportation from the only country they have ever known.

Women’s football’s winning streak

PHOTO: ALAMY
On Wednesday evening England will play Austria in Manchester, opening the Women’s European Championships. Last time England hosted the football tournament, in 2005, the games were confined to five grounds in the country’s north-west and just 120,000 fans attended the 15 matches. This time more than 500,000 tickets have been bought in advance. The final, to be held at Wembley stadium in London on July 31st, will be played in front of 87,000 fans.

The competition has been expanded to 16 teams, reflecting the growing popularity of the women’s game. Star names, including France’s Wendie Renard, Norway’s Ada Hegerberg and Spain’s Alexia Putellas, now attract sponsorships from major brands. And the tournament is likely to be highly competitive: bookies reckon six of the 16 teams have a decent chance of winning. Women’s football has arrived.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which country was the subject of three partitions in the late 18th century?

Tuesday: Which Californian city is named after an 18th century bishop and philosopher?

Nothing is worth more than laughter. It is strength to laugh and to abandon oneself, to be light.

Frida Kahlo
