The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (00:55 GMT+1 / 07:55 Hong Kong)

Russia said that a fire at the Novoshakhtinsk oil refinery close to the border with Ukraine was caused by an attack from two drones. Meanwhile, at least 20 people were killed as Russian forces rained down missiles on Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second largest city. Life in the city had been returning to relative normality in recent weeks before this resumption of hostilities. British military intelligence cited the “extraordinary attrition” rates suffered by Russian and pro-Russian militia forces in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine.

Jerome Powell told a Senate hearing that the Federal Reserve is “strongly committed” to bringing down inflation, now running at a 40-year high in America. The central-bank chief said that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and continuing covid-19 lockdowns would continue to push inflation up. But he said that America’s economy was strong enough “to handle tighter monetary policy.”

Kaja Kallas, Estonia’s prime minister, said her country would be wiped from the map under NATO’s current defence plans. Ms Kallas warned that the three Baltic states would be overrun by Russian forces should Moscow choose to attack. Her remarks serve as a preview for a NATO summit in Madrid next week, where members will discuss the defence of their eastern flank.

President Joe Biden asked Congress for a three-month suspension of the federal fuel tax as Americans reckon with soaring petrol prices and high inflation. The national average for a gallon of petrol is nearly $5, up roughly 60% from a year ago. Some Democrats worry that energy companies will benefit more than consumers. Republicans also oppose the move, making its passage doubtful.

In a speech to the country days after losing his parliamentary majority, Emmanuel Macron said France’s politicians “must learn to govern and legislate differently”. The French president suggested that opposition parties would work with him on inflation, climate change and unemployment. Mr Macron argued that he was re-elected to enact ambitious reforms. He may have to scramble for the votes needed to do so.

A 6.1-magnitude earthquake in Afghanistan killed at least 1,000 people and injured hundreds more, according to officials. The quake struck Paktika province near the border with Pakistan but tremors were felt as far away as India. Relief efforts are likely to be complicated since several international aid agencies left the country following the Taliban’s return to power last year.

Elon Musk said Tesla’s factories in Texas and Germany are haemorrhaging cash as supply-chain woes and shortages of electric-vehicle batteries hamper production. In an interview last month that was recently posted on YouTube, Tesla’s founder likened his factories to “gigantic money furnaces” losing billions of dollars. Last week Mr Musk said he would cut the firm’s workforce by 10%.

Fact of the Day: 79%, how much higher the number of suicides was in the Chinese city of Wuhan during lockdown in 2020 than in the same period in 2019. Read the full article.

BRICS and mortars

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
This year’s BRICS summit begins on Thursday, in awkward circumstances. Leaders of the group’s main members—Brazil, China, India and Russia—have met annually since 2009 (with South Africa joining in 2010) to discuss issues of interest to the emerging world’s leading economic powers. Yet this year’s two-day virtual proceedings, hosted by China’s president, Xi Jinping, will unfold against a global backdrop marred by the war his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, is waging in Ukraine and the consequent economic fallout.

Mr Xi would like to use the summit to bring big emerging economies into closer alignment with China—and against the West. Indeed, expansion will be on the agenda with Argentina and Saudi Arabia among several countries joining the meeting. Discussion of Ukraine will be avoided. And India is likely to resist efforts to send an overtly anti-American message (its appetite for Russian arms and oil notwithstanding). Given the war’s heavy global costs, Mr Xi may struggle to find any group solidarity.

In the foothills of EU accession

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ukrainians starved for good news may get a bit from Brussels on Thursday. A summit of the European Council, composed of the EU’s national leaders, is expected to grant Ukraine candidate status. That is the first step on the long road to membership. Moldova, which also has a reformist government threatened by Russia, is likely to be given candidate status too, while Georgia will be asked to meet more conditions.

There will be less joy for four western Balkan countries. Albania, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia would like to join the EU but have been on hold for years. (North Macedonia is being blocked by Bulgaria; a French-brokered compromise is now hostage to an unfolding government crisis in Sofia.) EU members will discuss granting certain benefits of membership, such as visa-free travel, during the accession process and, for other countries, some form of looser European association. On Friday the council will take up an even bigger problem: the continent’s worsening economy.

A dry run for Britain’s next general election

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Britain’s governing Conservative Party faces a pair of parliamentary by-elections on Thursday. The contests will stress-test the popularity of Boris Johnson, the prime minister, in two very different seats.

Both votes came about in the grubbiest of circumstances. In Wakefield, a city in northern England, where the Tories enjoy a majority of 3,358 over Labour, the previous MP was convicted of sexually assaulting a child in 2008. In Tiverton and Honiton, a sprawling farming seat in the south-west, a majority of 24,239 is under assault from the Liberal Democrats. There, the poll was triggered after the Tory MP admitted watching pornography while at work in the House of Commons. The by-elections will show whether voters are willing to forgive either of these scandals, on top of “Partygate” in which Mr Johnson was fined for breaking lockdown rules—and how far a big squeeze on living standards is eroding Conservative support.

Cities’ return to normality

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Life in the world’s cities is improving. Every year EIU, the research and analysis division of The Economist Group, compiles an index of urban “liveability”. The average score for 2022 is 73.6, up more than four points from 2021.

The EIU’s index rates living conditions according to such things as stability, health care, culture, environment, education and infrastructure. Western cities have fared well, having lifted most covid restrictions after successful vaccine rollouts. Vienna tops the ranking for the third time since 2018, and five other European cities make the top ten, joined by three cities in Canada.

There are notable exceptions to the trend. Every city in China has slipped down the rankings. And the war in Ukraine is weighing heavily. EIU had to abandon its Kyiv survey when fighting broke out, and life in Russian cities has become less tolerable as censorship tightens—and Western sanctions bite.


Worrying about monkeypox

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Scientists are still unsure why monkeypox, a virus that causes symptoms similar to those of chickenpox—fever, exhaustion and pustules—is spreading so rapidly. Usually the disease is confined to parts of Africa. But this year the World Health Organisation has identified 2,103 confirmed cases in 42 countries. (The one death recorded so far was in Nigeria.) On Thursday the WHO meets to decide whether to classify the monkeypox outbreak a “public-health emergency of international concern” (PHEIC), a designation currently applied only to covid-19 and polio.

A PHEIC is a technical designation applied to an “extraordinary event” that is determined to constitute a public-health risk through the international spread of disease. If the WHO does declare one for monkeypox, it will also issue recommendations on how governments should handle outbreaks. The world’s limited supply of smallpox vaccines, which can protect people from monkeypox, could help. Distributing them will require international co-ordination. But that may be easier than it was for covid vaccines, as the demand, thankfully, is not as great.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: What term was devised by Arthur Okun, an economist, to describe a measure that added the unemployment rate to the inflation rate?

Wednesday: Which Massachusetts town was gripped by a series of witch trials in 1692 and 1693?

I have had dreams, and I’ve had nightmares. I overcame the nightmares because of my dreams.

Jonas Salk
