The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 23, 2023

President Joe Biden said that America would defend "every inch of NATO" as he met with nine leaders from the alliance's eastern flank in Poland. Earlier, his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin said that relations between China and Russia had reached "new milestones" in a meeting with Wang Yi, China's top diplomat. His visit is expected to lay the ground for a meeting between Mr. Putin and China's President Xi Jinping, probably in this spring. The diplomatic flurry comes ahead of the first anniversary of Russia's invasion on Friday.

Israeli forces killed at least ten Palestinians and injured scores more in a daytime raid in the city of Nablus in the West Bank. The Israeli army said it targeted Palestinian terrorists from two militant groups, Lion’s Den and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Israel and Palestine have seen an uptick in violence this year including a deadly raid on the city of Jenin last month.

America’s Federal Reserve was unified in its decision on February 1st to raise interest rates by one-quarter of a percentage point, the group’s meeting minutes showed. Some policymakers, however, said they supported raising rates by a half-percentage point to more effectively combat inflation. The Fed’s February rate increase was of a smaller increment than the six before it.

Intel slashed its annual dividend by two-thirds, to 50 cents a share, amid a cost-cutting drive and flagging demand for chips. The American chipmaker’s boss said free cash flow “fell below our guard bands” in the fourth quarter of 2022, when it recorded a loss, and earlier promised to save $3bn this year. Intel has forecast another loss in the current quarter.

Heavy rains have killed 48 people in south-eastern Brazil since the deluge started last weekend, officials said. Dozens remain missing, and cities such as São Sebastião and Ubatuba have cancelled their carnival festivities as rescue efforts continue. More Brazilians are dying in devastating floods and landslides, partly because of badly situated and poorly constructed housing in areas vulnerable to them.

Toyota, Japan’s largest carmaker, upped the wages of 68,000 of their unionised workers in annual pay negotiations. The raise—the company’s largest in two decades—prompted Honda to follow suit with a 5% increase. That will be welcomed by the country’s central bank, which has committed to ultra-low interest rates partly to break three-decades of stagnation in Japanese wages.

Shamima Begum lost her appeal against a decision to revoke her British citizenship after she travelled to Syria to join Islamic State at the age of 15. Britain’s government stripped Ms Begum of her citizenship in 2019, and has refused to repatriate her from a refugee camp in northern Syria. It argues that Ms Begum is a security risk.

Fact of the day: 40%, the percentage of the Philippines’ electrical grid owned by Chinese firms. Read the full story.


PHOTO: DPA
The euro zone’s volatile inflation data
Tech problems are especially embarrassing when everyone is watching. As the world awaited the release of the euro zone’s January inflation figures on February 1st, Eurostat, the EU’s statistics bureau, announced that Germany’s contribution was missing because of a technical problem that had forced the agency merely to estimate the country’s figure. On Thursday Europe’s price data will be updated and released.

The revision will probably be upward. Germany published its full January figures on Wednesday. They show consumer prices rising by 9.2% year-on-year, or 0.5% on the previous month (not seasonally adjusted). The energy data show why. As a one-off government rebate on utility bills ran out, energy prices increased by 8.3% between December and January. Energy costs have come down in wholesale markets, but it is not clear if or when that decline will be passed on to consumers. Europe’s inflation data over the coming months may be volatile, IT problems or not.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
The Fed’s magical disappearing act
When the Federal Reserve publishes new balance-sheet figures on Thursday, they will probably show another step downwards. Since mid-2022 the Fed has shrunk its assets from $9trn to $8.4trn. This carefully managed decline is known as quantitative tightening (QT), the reverse of the quantitative easing (QE)—purchases of bonds on a massive scale—used by the Fed to support the economy during downturns.

The Fed wants QT to play out quietly. It plans to shrink its balance-sheet by about $2.5trn in total by mid-2024 in order to bring it closer to its pre-covid size. But the Fed’s monetary operations may soon get trickier. Many investors think that it will shift from raising interest rates to cutting them later this year as economic growth falters. That could create a conflict in which the Fed is cutting rates (a form of easing) at the same time as shrinking its assets (a form of tightening). Markets would go from QE to QT to Q-confusion.


PHOTO: AP
Alibaba looks to the future
China’s reopening after three years of zero-covid measures is great news for consumer-tech giants like Alibaba and Tencent. The attempt by the country’s president, Xi Jinping, to shut out the pandemic depressed consumption, and these companies suffered. The extent of the pain will become clearer on Thursday when Alibaba reports its fourth-quarter earnings.

Most analysts think that revenues shrank a bit year-on-year, although earnings per share may have risen from the previous quarter. Investors will be poring over company statements in hopes of finding signs that the worst is over. Some believe that opening up will result in a consumption boom, as households finally get the opportunity to spend their pandemic savings. That should boost sales on Alibaba’s platforms of discretionary goods such as clothing and cosmetics. Others will be looking for hints that Mr Xi’s crackdown on big tech is over.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
BAE Systems and the race to arm Ukraine
Britain’s FTSE 100 share index has been on a tear of late, but few of its companies have done as well as BAE Systems. The share price of Europe’s biggest defence contractor, which reports its financial results for 2022 on Thursday, has risen by more than 50% over the past year. As a manufacturer of everything from frigates and fighter jets to electronic-warfare systems, it has done very well out of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

A BAE product, the 155mm howitzer shell, is at the heart of the West’s struggle to keep Ukraine’s arsenal stocked. Having exhausted their Soviet-era ammunition, Ukraine’s army increasingly relies on NATO countries for such shells. Yet America and Europe combined currently make enough in a year only to maintain a three-month barrage. That is a worry as Ukraine faces the prospect of a new Russian offensive. BAE’s earnings will interest investors. But of more immediate importance is how fast it can ramp up production.


PHOTO: VIVIAN YOON
A confessional K-pop podcast
Growing up, Vivian Yoon hid a secret behind her baggy jeans and emo records. The Korean-American was raised in Los Angeles’s K-town, the centre of its Korean diaspora. But one thing she would never reveal: she loved K-pop.

For more than a decade now, K-pop has been globally popular and Ms Yoon (pictured) is ready to confess. A writer and actor, her new podcast, “K-pop Dreaming”, recounts the rise of K-pop and Korean-Americans’ contribution to it. The first two episodes, released on Thursday, suggest that both the music and the diaspora have been explored better elsewhere. But then the podcast’s real subject is Ms Yoon herself. Her attempts to figure out how her Korean heritage and K-Town upbringing have shaped her life are the podcast’s most compelling elements, and perhaps its most divisive. Listeners charmed by Ms Yoon’s openness will enjoy her frequent autobiographical recollections. For others, her confessional style may be a distraction from her musical and sociological themes.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Thursday: Which native American people, who lived along the St Lawrence river, were also known as the Wyandot?

Wednesday: Which ex-football star’s wife was once known as “Posh Spice”?

The cost of liberty is less than the price of repression.

W.E.B. Du Bois
