The world in brief
April 22, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Despite the declaration of a ceasefire in Sudan, fighting continued in the streets of Khartoum, the capital. Sudan’s ruling military junta agreed to the 72-hour truce for the Muslim holiday of Eid al-Fitr on Friday, shortly after the Rapid Support Forces, an opposition militia, said they would temporarily lay down their arms. Since the conflict erupted on April 15th at least 413 people have been killed and more than 3,5000 injured.

America’s Supreme Court kept mifepristone, an abortion pill, available pending litigation. The order blocked a lower-court ruling that would have restricted its use. The case will return to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, then could be appealed back up to the Supreme Court, a process that could take months. Samuel Alito and Clarence Thomas, two conservative justices, dissented.

Dominic Raab resigned as Britain’s deputy prime minister and justice secretary after the release of the findings of a bullying probe. Britain’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, ordered the inquiry in November after civil servants complained about Mr Raab’s intimidating behaviour towards subordinates. In his resignation letter, Mr Raab said that the report created a “dangerous precedent” by setting a “low” bar for bullying.

A Russian Su-34 warplane accidentally bombed the Russian city of Belgorod, near the border with Ukraine. Two people were injured and several buildings damaged. The country’s ministry of defence said it would investigate the “emergency release of an air ordnance”.

A jury in California said Tesla bore no fault for an accident involving the alleged malfunctioning of its semi-automated driving system, known as Autopilot. It appears to have been the first such case to go to trial. Separately, the carmaker reversed recent discounts on two high-end models in America. Investors were unenthusiastic about price cuts, which have dented profitability.

Argentina’s president, Alberto Fernández, said he would not seek re-election in October. The announcement follows months of infighting among his left-leaning ruling coalition, whose popularity has tanked as Argentina grapples with inflation above 100%, dwindling dollar reserves and a poverty rate near 40%.

Twenty countries in the EU, led by Slovenia, are lobbying for more regulation to prevent impure honey being sold in the bloc. Exporters, mostly from China, have been undercutting European beekeepers by selling cheaper products mixed with sugar syrup and water—a practice one official calls “honey laundering”. The group wants tighter rules around labelling and more stringent checks on imports.

Word of the week: chai ya wazee, “tea for the elders” in Swahili, a way of asking for a bribe without asking for a bribe in Kenya. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A coming counter-offensive in Ukraine
The war in Ukraine continues to follow its familiar pattern. Russian attacks in the eastern town of Bakhmut grind down Ukrainian resistance. Images published on Tuesday showed that Russian forces had reached the far north-west of the town, amid fierce urban warfare. Ukraine has mounted a handful of local counter-attacks. But everyone is waiting for a larger counter-offensive, expected in the coming days or weeks, to begin.

Ukraine’s army is still stocking up. On Wednesday the Biden administration announced a fresh $325m aid package which included shells and rockets, demolition munitions to clear obstacles—vital for breaching Russian defences—and anti-tank weapons. In recent days Ukraine has also received new air-defence systems from America, Germany and the Netherlands, including advanced Patriot batteries that can shoot down ballistic missiles. Ukraine’s dilemma is that it must wait long enough to build up its arsenal, yet move quickly enough to take advantage of Russia’s exhaustion.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China’s carmakers are revving up
Motor shows may be on the way out elsewhere in the world. But a jamboree in Shanghai, which opened this week, has attracted 1,000 international exhibitors. Carmakers are showing off 100 new models. The event is testament to the growing influence of China on a vast global industry worth nearly $3trn in annual revenues.

Established firms are scrambling to adapt to new ways of doing business. Electrification is supplanting internal combustion, software features have come to define and differentiate brands and autonomous vehicles are inching closer to reality. Adept at all three, Chinese carmakers are—along with Elon Musk’s Tesla—exerting an increasing influence on the industry. Tesla has inspired a host of new electric-vehicle entrants, and China’s car firms are poised to make significant inroads in Europe. A highly competitive global industry is set to get more cut-throat and innovative, making cars better all round.


PHOTO: EYEVINE
Celebrating a multi-talented Chevalier
John Adams, one of America’s founding fathers, described Joseph Bologne, a biracial polymath also known as Chevalier de Saint-Georges, as the “the most accomplished man in Europe in riding, shooting, fencing, dancing and music”. Yet until recently, these accomplishments were mostly forgotten.

Born in Guadeloupe in the mid-18th century, Bologne was the illegitimate son of a wealthy French plantation owner and an enslaved Senegalese woman. He grew up in France and became a composer, conductor, violinist and regular at the court of Marie Antoinette, where his gifts as a champion fencer were rewarded with the title Chevalier.

A recent raft of recordings and performances of his compositions have sparked renewed interest in Bologne’s work. Now his fascinating life is the subject of a mostly fictional film, “Chevalier,” released this week in America. In one scene, Bologne and Mozart face off in a battle of musical one-upmanship on their violins. The film should further raise the profile of a brilliant man with memorably nimble fingers and feet.


PHOTO: ALAMY
The business of fertility, on screen
Identical twins begin as two halves of a whole, until the zygote splits into two embryos. The complex bond between twins is at the heart of “Dead Ringers”, a series released on Prime Video on Friday. The Mantle sisters, identical twins, are beautiful, brilliant, codependent gynaecologists. Elliot snorts cocaine and experiments with ovarian tissue in the lab; Beverly wants to help pregnant women. They seek investment for a fertility clinic—except their backers care only about commodifying female reproduction. Ditch ethics for profits, they urge. This delights Elliot, but horrifies Beverly.

Screenwriters are increasingly looking to the Eighties for inspiration; this series is a remake of David Cronenberg’s body-horror thriller of 1988. Adaptations often fail to carry the original idea to term. But this creation from Alice Birch (who co-wrote the BBC’s “Normal People”) is darkly funny, and Rachel Weisz’s double act as both sisters is sure to win plaudits. In an era of egg-freezing and other fertility innovations, the show is eerily foreboding.


PHOTO: TWITTER
Weekend profile: Sarah Bils, aka Donbass Devushka, pro-Russian propagandist
Until last weekend the most remarkable thing about Sarah Bils’s life seemed to be that, while serving in the American navy, she also ran a shop selling tropical fish. The 37-year-old, who was born to American parents in New Jersey and enlisted in 2009, served as an electronics technician before being discharged in November 2022. She now finds herself at the centre of one of America’s worst intelligence breaches in a decade.

On April 16th Ms Bils was revealed to be Donbass Devushka (“Donbas Girl”), a social-media personality who since 2014 has posted pro-Russian propaganda in English on Telegram, Twitter and YouTube. Since the invasion of Ukraine she has built a vast network that also includes podcasts, merchandise and fundraising efforts.

Online activists and journalists from the Wall Street Journal and Malcontent News, a news site, pieced together her story. Donbass Devushka has claimed to be a Russian Jew from Rostov-on-Don, a Russian city near the Ukraine border, and to have lived in Luhansk, part of the Ukraine’s Donbas region now occupied by Russia. The avatar on her accounts is an attractive, dark-haired woman holding a large grey cat. (Ms Bils, seen in videos touting fish food, looks less glamorous.) On a podcast she co-presents, Donbass Devuskha’s pro-Kremlin guests are as questionable as her Eastern European accent, which often slips into an American one. Recently Ms Bils changed her name to Lyudmila Mikhailova Karakova.

Her clumsy attempts at an alter ego are easy to mock. But Ms Bils’s alleged role in President Vladmir Putin’s disinformation war is serious. The FBI and the navy are investigating Ms Bils’s activities related to the accounts—pushing pro-Russian propaganda while serving in the navy—and her role in America’s worst intelligence breach in decades. On April 13th Jack Teixeira, a 21-year-old air-force man, was arrested for leaking hundreds of classified documents on Discord, a chat site. Donbass Devushka appears to have been a critical link between his online community and the broader internet. Bellingcat, an investigative group, showed that some of these classified materials were noticed only after they were shared on Donbass Devushka’s Telegram account on April 5th,. From there they were picked up by Russian propagandists and other media. That then led to the discovery of more documents.

One of the documents shared by Donbass Devushka had been altered from the version shared by Mr Teixeira, to inflate the number of Ukrainian casualties and reduce Russian ones. On April 13th that was shared by Tucker Carlson, a presenter on Fox News, as proof that Ukraine was losing the war.

Ms Bils admits to being an administrator of Donbass Devushka, but says that she is merely one of more than a dozen. She denies sharing the leaked files herself or doctoring them. For now, her precise role remains as murky as her motivations.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Green vehicles frantically race circles around small track (8, 4)

1 across Puzzle is confusing in game (6)

2 across Steal books for one who can’t think for themselves (5)

3 across Desert leaders of sect after hiding and running away (6)

Factual clues

1 down What have been helped by tough emissions regulations (8, 4)

1 across What can baffle the brightest minds (6)

2 across Something researchers at Google are using a large language model to control (5)

3 across An arid vastness above the Sahel (6)



The winners of last week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Himmat Kalsia, New Delhi, India
Jean Murray, Ottawa, Canada
Thomas Kestner, Tokyo, Japan.

They gave the correct answers of British Columbia, Challenger 2, Discovery, Atlantis and Enterprise. The theme is that they are all names of America’s space shuttles.

The questions were:
Monday: Victoria is the capital of which Canadian province?
Tuesday: What type of tank has the British government sent to Ukraine?
Wednesday: Which TV channel runs an annual “Shark Week”?
Thursday: Which fictional island was invented by Plato in his works “Timaeus” and “Critias”?
Friday: Scott Bakula, Chris Pine and Patrick Stewart have all played the captains of which vessel?

Science is not everything, but science is very beautiful.

Robert Oppenheimer