The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (02:43 GMT+1 / 09:43 Hong Kong)

Elon Musk completed his on-off-on takeover of Twitter, closing a deal worth $44bn. His first action was reportedly to fire the social-media platform’s CEO, Parag Agrawal, and several other top executives. Despite promising to limit censorship on the site, Mr Musk must also convince advertisers that Twitter will not descend into a free-for-all. Adverts contributed nearly nine-tenths of Twitter’s revenues last year.

America’s economy expanded by 2.6% in the third quarter, the strongest annualised growth rate since last year. But that was largely due to a drop in imports and a surge in exports; domestic demand rose by just 0.5%. Consumer spending slowed. Separately, the average interest rate on a 30-year mortgage rose to 7.08% for the first time in 20 years. Interest-rate rises by the Federal Reserve are cooling the housing market.

Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, declared that the West’s “dominance over world affairs is coming to an end” in a speech to the Valdai Discussion Club, a talk shop in Moscow. Meanwhile the White House cautioned that any attacks on American satellites would be met with retaliation after a senior Russian official called them “legitimate” targets if they were involved in the war in Ukraine.

Amazon’s share price plummeted by about 15% in post-session trading. The e-retailer’s quarterly revenues grew by 15% year over year, to $127.1bn, though still fell short of forecasts. Net income declined by 9%, to $2.9bn. Apple, meanwhile, beat analysts’ expectations to report record results for the July-to-September quarter. Revenues at the iPhone-maker rose by 8% year over year, to $90.1bn; net income was $20.7bn.

The European Central Bank has doubled its key interest rate to 1.5%, the highest level since 2009, and signalled that it would increase further. The ECB is determined to curb “far too high” levels of inflation (the euro area’s figure was 9.9% in September). European leaders voiced concern over raising rates and dampening demand given that Europe is heading into a recession.

Royal Dutch Shell posted underlying profits of $9.5bn in the third quarter, more than double the figure in the same period last year but a slowdown from a bumper second quarter. The war in Ukraine briefly pushed oil prices to $120 a barrel. Europe’s largest oil and gas company said they would raise its payout to shareholders by 15% amid calls for a more stringent windfall tax.

Stormont, Northern Ireland’s parliament, has been recalled in an eleventh-hour attempt to form a government. The devolved region’s power-sharing agreement collapsed in May, when Sinn Féin, the left-wing party associated with Irish unification, won the election. The DUP, which came second, want a closer trade union with Britain. This year’s second election will be triggered if no compromise is reached by midnight.

Fact of the day: 61%, the share of countries where adherence to the rule of law fell in the past year, according to the World Justice Project. Read the full article.

Meta’s unhappy anniversary

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
One year ago on Friday Mark Zuckerberg changed the name of his company from Facebook to Meta. Under that new banner just about everything has gone wrong. Earlier this year the company reported its first year-on-year drop in quarterly revenue and the first decline in users of Facebook, its social network. Investors hoped it was a blip. But on Wednesday Meta said quarterly revenue had fallen again, by 4%, and predicted it would drop in the next quarter too. In response the company’s share price plunged by nearly a quarter.

But these are mere Earthly problems. Mr Zuckerberg believes his company’s future lies in the metaverse, an online space to work, play and watch ads. Meta has spent tens of billions of dollars building it. But fewer than 200,000 people reportedly use Meta’s flagship metaverse app. One day the metaverse may take off. The question is whether Meta, which has lost more than 70% of its market value this year, will still be around then.


The beat of a different drum in Pakistan

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Friday Imran Khan begins a protest march from the eastern city of Lahore to Islamabad, the capital. Pakistan’s former prime minister demands that elections, scheduled for late next year, are brought forward. Mr Khan was ousted earlier this year by a vote of no confidence. He is hoping that a show of street power will pile pressure on the government to dissolve parliament. The former cricketer-turned-politician has gathered support by spinning a fantastical tale of an American plot to oust him from office. He recently presented himself as a headline candidate in a clutch of by-elections; he won six of seven seats.

Mr Khan’s march adds to Pakistan’s other political and economic woes. Massive flooding this monsoon season caused an estimated $40bn in damages. The country is battling high inflation and energy shortages, as well as seeking $27bn in debt rescheduling, much of it from China. If the government cracks down on Mr Khan’s march, more political turmoil will follow.

More gushing profits for Exxon

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Friday ExxonMobil releases its results for the third quarter. America’s largest oil firm has already hinted that it probably won’t match the record $17.9bn in profits it posted for the previous quarter—but that it will come close, despite oil prices falling from their dizzying heights after Russia invaded Ukraine. Cheaper crude, a result of Russia’s continued exports and the slowing global economy, combined with lower refinery margins to dent Exxon’s haul. But margins were boosted by sales of pricey natural gas, especially to energy-starved Europe.

Now gas prices have receded but oil prices are up again, boosted by a big cut to the monthly output target of OPEC+, a cartel of producers. Exxon still has worries, such as its clash with America’s energy secretary over caps on fuel exports. Earlier in October the company left Russia empty-handed after President Vladimir Putin expropriated some of its Russian assets. But for the foreseeable future, energy scarcity will keep boosting their bottom line.

Northern Ireland heads to elections, again

PHOTO: PA
Northern Ireland has had no regional government since February. Both of its two biggest parties can block the other from governing. Sinn Féin, which won its first election in May, wants a united Ireland. The runner-up Democratic Unionist Party wants to keep Northern Ireland British. At midnight on Friday, six months since the last election, their time to re-establish a power-sharing government ran out, triggering a fresh election. It will probably be held on December 15th.

Both parties are expected to consolidate their positions with voters. Whichever wins, their main contention—on the Northern Ireland protocol that created a new Irish Sea border with Britain after Brexit—will remain unresolved. To prevent the region from stagnating in the meantime, Westminster may give more power to civil servants, who in effect ran the country the last time the government collapsed in 2017. Then, it took three years to replace them with politicians. The lengthy backlog of untaken government decisions looks set to grow.

When Harry Met Harry

PHOTO: AP
On Friday “Bros”, one of Hollywood’s first gay romantic comedies, is released in Britain. Co-written by its star, Billy Eichner (“Parks and Recreation”), and by its director, Nicholas Stoller (“Forgetting Sarah Marshall”), the film is a sweetly old-fashioned New York rom-com in many respects. Mr Eichner plays a celebrity podcaster who doesn’t want a long-term relationship but might be persuaded by a hunky lawyer (Luke Macfarlane) he meets at a party.

The film is anxious to mark itself apart from heterosexual smash hits, making copious references to Grindr, poppers, threesomes and foursomes. It also takes some satirical swipes at “Brokeback Mountain” and other gay-themed dramas with straight casts: the numerous LGBT characters in “Bros” are all played by LGBT actors. American box-office sales have so far disappointed. Mr Eichner partly blamed homophobia. But the fact is that grown-up, sincere romantic comedies are out of fashion, whatever the sexuality of their leads.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which singer-songwriter gave a rapid tour of modern history in his song “We Didn’t Start the Fire”?

Thursday: Which American swimmer was the star of a series of “aquamusicals” in the late 1940s and early ’50s?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Oliver Davies, Hong Kong, China

North America: Michael Zenaitis, Calgary, Canada

Central and South America: Sebastian Agudelo-Restrepo, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic

Europe: Imad Orif, Edinburgh, United Kingdom

Africa: Christine Reiter, Tunis, Tunisia

Oceania: Richard Lyon, Greenwich, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of restitution, Riyadh, Truss and Nature. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

The abstract kills, the concrete saves

Sylvia Plath
