The world in brief
August 15, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

President Vladimir Putin’s economic adviser admonished Russia’s central bank for loose monetary policy as the rouble slid past a 16-month low to 102 against the dollar, having lost around 30% of its value this year. The bank had earlier blamed the slump on deteriorating foreign trade conditions. It said it may raise its key interest rate and convened an unscheduled rate meeting on Tuesday. The currency has suffered from escalated military spending, Western sanctions and European countries’ diversification away from Russian energy supplies.

Niger’s military government vowed to prosecute Mohamed Bazoum, the deposed president, for “high treason”. The junta, which seized power last month, accused Mr Bazoum of “undermining the internal and external security of Niger”. Earlier a group of Islamic scholars who held mediation talks with the generals reported that they are open to diplomacy and to talks with west African leaders.

The death toll from wildfires in Hawaii rose to at least 96. It is the deadliest natural disaster since the archipelago became an American state in 1959. Josh Green, Hawaii’s governor, promised to investigate the response to the fires. Many residents have complained that emergency-warning systems never sounded. President Joe Biden said he was “looking into” visiting Hawaii in the coming days.

A judge in Montana sided with 16 young environmentalists who sued the state for violating their constitutional right to a “clean and healthful environment”—the first such case to reach trial in America. The plaintiffs, aged five to 22, argued that a state provision that barred agencies from considering climate change when approving fossil-fuel projects was unconstitutional. The court struck down the provision.

Foxconn, the world’s largest contract manufacturer, said it expects falling sales this year, having previously predicted flat revenue. The Taiwanese giant reported second-quarter net earnings of NT$33bn ($1bn), a 1% drop compared with last year. Global demand for electronics is dwindling due to an economic downturn. In August Apple, Foxconn’s biggest customer, predicted its longest sales slump in decades.

Seven prominent pro-democracy activists in Hong Kong, including Jimmy Lai, a media tycoon, were cleared of organising an unauthorised protest in 2019. Their convictions for attending the march were upheld. The rally, which organisers claimed 1.7m people attended, was part of a wave of anti-government protests. A draconian national-security law imposed in 2020 to prevent further unrest has largely silenced dissent.

Paris Saint-Germain, a French football club, agreed a deal worth around €90m ($98m) for the sale of Neymar, a Brazilian forward, to Al Hilal, a Saudi club. If completed, the move will continue a huge spending spree by Saudi Pro League clubs, who have spent over $500m on transfer fees this summer—catapulting them into the premier league of global football’s biggest spenders.

Figure of the day: 44%, the amount of the world’s total mail volume delivered by the United States Postal Service. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Narendra Modi celebrates
Delhi will be awash with tricolour flags on Tuesday as India celebrates 76 years of independence. Narendra Modi, the prime minister, who will speak on the occasion at the Red Fort in Delhi, has more reason to celebrate than most. With less than a year to go until a general election, around 75% of Indians approve of the way he runs the country. In parliament last week he easily deflected the latest attempt by the opposition to hold his government to account for its handling of a deadly ethnic conflict in the north-eastern state of Manipur (Mr Modi has not visited the state since violence erupted in early May).

America and other Western countries, keen to enlist India in their geopolitical rivalry with China, are keeping largely mum about the government’s Hindu-nationalist ideology, the attacks on civil society and the increasingly aggressive sidelining of India’s 200m Muslims. Nine years into the job, Mr Modi is sitting tighter than ever.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Rising anxiety about China’s economy
President Joe Biden is among those now worried about China’s economy. Thanks to an ageing population and weak hiring, China is a “ticking time-bomb”, he said at a fundraiser this month. “So they got some problems,” he concluded. On Tuesday China’s government will provide an update on the precise size of these problems.

New data may show that youth unemployment in China’s cities, which reached 21.3% in June, rose again in July, as more graduates finished their studies and began looking for work. Other figures will reveal whether the recovery in services, like catering, is abating or spreading to big-ticket consumer goods.

This month China has already reported declining consumer prices, a precipitous drop in exports and alarmingly weak demand for credit. On top of all that, Mr Biden’s government has imposed new limits on American investment in the country. If China does indeed have problems, Mr Biden is one of them.


PHOTO: AP
Investigating America’s withdrawal from Afghanistan
Two years ago on Tuesday images of desperate Afghans climbing onto American cargo planes to escape the Taliban shocked the world. On August 15th 2021 Kabul fell when Afghanistan’s government surrendered after a chaotic final withdrawal of American and coalition troops. Thousands of Afghans who had worked with the Americans (and others) were stranded.

The humanitarian crisis marked a bitter end to a 20-year war. Republicans refuse to let President Joe Biden, who completed the hasty withdrawal begun by Donald Trump, forget. Michael McCaul, a congressman from Texas, claims that the Biden administration had no evacuation plan and has subpoenaed documents from the State Department. Despite receiving some records, Mr McCaul remains unsatisfied and has given the department until Wednesday to produce further material.

Democrats suspect Mr McCaul is unlikely to uncover significant new information. Some Republicans doubt the public even cares. To the Afghans left behind, routes to safety that do not involve smugglers and dinghies may matter more.


PHOTO: AP
An international force for Haiti
Discussions will intensify this week about an international peacekeeping force for Haiti. A request last year by the country’s prime minister, Ariel Henry, for help to combat rampant gang violence received widespread backing, including from the UN. But the process stalled when no country was willing to take the lead. Last month Kenya offered to do so, and America said it would be willing to sponsor a resolution for the UN Security Council to authorise a deployment.

The Kenyan offer of 1,000 police has been controversial, given the force’s poor human-rights record at home. In any case, Haitians dislike the idea of more foreign boots in their country. But they see no other way to tame the chaos. Since the assassination of the former president, Jovenel Moïse, in July 2021, there have been no elections in Haiti. Killings, kidnappings and sexual abuse have increased dramatically, according to a new report by Human Rights Watch, a lobby group. Even with international intervention, an end to Haiti’s misery seems far off.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Home Depot’s housing problem
On Tuesday Home Depot, America’s largest home-improvement retailer, reports its second-quarter earnings. Its profits have probably slid: as the housing market cools, American shoppers are spending less on DIY materials and expensive items like patio furniture and barbecues.

America’s benchmark interest rate is at its highest in over two decades, putting off homebuyers—4m existing homes were sold in the year to June, a fall of 3.3% on the previous 12 months. Foreign investors are also retreating. International buyers bought around 85,000 American homes between April 2022 and March this year, the fewest since this data was first tracked in 2009.

There is some good news on the horizon. Inflation is gradually subsiding, a sign that the Federal Reserve’s policy of raising interest rates is working. Investors now expect the Fed to start cutting rates in 2024. That should encourage borrowing, and shopping. Home Depot will have to endure the pain for just a little longer.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which sculptor, the first woman to win the Turner prize, is best known for her cast of the inside of a terraced house?

Monday: Which British actor created the comedy “Fleabag”?

What’s behind you doesn’t matter.

Enzo Ferrari
