The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 28, 2023

At least seven people were shot dead by a Palestinian gunman at a synagogue in east Jerusalem. The shooter was killed by the police. On Thursday Israeli troops killed nine Palestinians during a military raid on Jenin refugee camp in the occupied West Bank, the deadliest raid in the camp in years. Israeli forces said they were targeting Islamist militants.

More than $50bn was wiped from the value of Gautam Adani’s conglomerate days after Hindenburg Research, a short-seller, accused it of fraud. The share price of Adani Enterprises—the flagship in the empire of India’s richest man—plunged by 17%. Nevertheless the firm proceeded with a share auction, in which it aims to raise $2.5bn. It called Hindenburg’s report “maliciously mischievous”.

David Solomon, chief executive of Goldman Sachs, received $25m in compensation last year, down by nearly 30% from 2021. His pay cut came amid stumbles by the investment bank, including an ill-fated foray into consumer lending, and a dealmaking drought that has hit profits. The bosses of JPMorgan Chase and Morgan Stanley each made north of $30m last year.

The Memphis Police Department released four videos of Tyre Nichols, a black man, being beaten by officers during a traffic stop on January 7th. Mr Nichols died from his injuries three days later. The five officers involved have been fired and charged with second-degree murder. Protests are underway in the Tennessee city and several others around America.

President Joe Biden selected Jeff Zients to replace Ron Klain as the White House chief of staff. The businessman—who co-owns a popular bagel chain in Washington, DC—co-ordinated the Biden administration’s covid-19 response. The reshuffle comes at a delicate moment: Mr Biden is under fire for his handling of classified documents as he gears up for a presidential re-election campaign next year.

Ukrainian soldiers arrived in Germany and will soon start training on 40 Marder fighting vehicles pledged to Ukraine. The preparation begins days after Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor, promised—after much dithering—to send German-made Leopard 2 tanks to fight Russia. The West has stepped up its military support for Ukraine in anticipation of an upcoming Russian offensive.

Hong Kong labelled cannabidiol (CBD) “a dangerous drug” and banned it. CBD, a non-psychoactive cannabis compound that has shown promise in reducing anxiety and pain, is currently available in bars and shops. From Wednesday trafficking and manufacturing CBD can carry a maximum penalty of life imprisonment and a HK$5m ($639,000) fine; possession will also be punished.

Word of the week: Blat, Russian for an “economy of favours”, meaning one based on contacts, cunning and petty bribery. Read the full story.

The Trump campaign begins again

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Donald Trump will be in South Carolina on Saturday trying to stabilise his 2024 presidential bid after a rocky start. Mr Trump announced his comeback campaign days after his party endured a humiliating setback in the midterm elections. Since then he has been plagued by scandal, including one over his dinner with a white nationalist. The growing appeal of rivals such as Ron DeSantis, the governor of Florida, has left the former president’s grip on the Republican Party in question.

Mr Trump’s event in South Carolina will not be one of the epic rallies he is known for, but a staid address at the state house for an audience of 500. It is proving difficult for the campaign to muster Republican grandees to appear behind him because so many are holding their endorsements until other challengers arrive. The king’s return may be a prelude not to a happy coronation but a bloody civil war.

In search of gas, Italy looks to Libya

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Saturday Libya’s National Oil Corporation will sign a giant gas deal with Eni, Italy’s oil major. The $8bn agreement—part of a broader plan by Giorgia Meloni, Italy’s prime minister, to deepen energy ties with Africa—will allow Eni to develop two of Libya’s offshore-gas fields. NOC says the sites could ultimately produce a total of 24m cubic metres of gas a day, about an eighth of what Italy currently consumes.

By reducing its gas exports to Europe, Russia has triggered a hunt for alternative supplies. In 2022 the EU inked gas deals with Azerbaijan, Egypt and Israel, among others. Many countries in the bloc are pursuing agreements on their own. This one, though, looks trickier than most. Political instability and civil war have long prevented Libya from capitalising on its vast natural-energy reserves. Two rival factions still claim control of the country. The eastern-based parliament says the government in Tripoli, the capital, lacks the legitimacy to sign anything.

Stumble at the Royal Rumble

PHOTO: REUTERS
Every January since 1988, World Wrestling Entertainment has gathered its elite wrestlers together for its Royal Rumble. Unlike other wrestling events, competitors enter the ring at fixed times rather than all at the start. The lycra-clad hall of fame includes Hulk Hogan, Shawn Michaels, “Stone Cold” Steve Austin and The Rock, who have each come out on top over the years.

This year’s event, held in San Antonio, Texas, on Saturday, also comes with plenty of drama outside the ring. Vince McMahon retired as WWE’s chief executive last year after an internal investigation found that he had paid $15m to settle sexual misconduct allegations by four women. However, he returned to the board of directors this month and has hired JPMorgan to explore selling WWE. With a market capitalisation of $6.3bn, the world’s largest wrestling institution has bidders circling. Decades after it was founded, its scripted theatrics continue to keep fans enthralled.

Psychotherapy on screen

PHOTO: PLANET PHOTOS
Jimmy Laird, the protagonist of “Shrinking”, a new series from Apple TV+, is a very bad therapist. Grieving his dead wife and stupefied by drinking, drugs and self-pity, he ditches the guiding rules of his profession and decides to become a “psychological vigilante”. He tells one patient to leave her husband or he will stop treating her, and invites another to live in his spare room.

The number of Americans that report having been treated for mental health has almost doubled since 2002. That explains why portrayals of therapy are proliferating on screen, in shows such as “The Patient”, “Couples Therapy” and “Stutz”. Though few therapists want to be seen as vigilantes, they will understand the need for a compelling narrative arc. More concerning in their eyes would be to suggest that treatment makes no difference.

Weekend Profile: Olga Tsukanova, Russian anti-mobilisation activist

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Last weekend Olga Tsukanova was heading to Moscow from her home in Samara, near the border with Kazakhstan, to deliver 700 letters written by disgruntled mothers of Russian soldiers to the prosecutor’s office. But at an airport in Samara she was detained, not for the first time, and warned she may be charged with “discrediting the army”. Ms Tsukanova has become the face of protests against Vladimir Putin’s mobilisation of Russian troops, though she is also uncomfortably close to peddlers of conspiracies about the war.

Ms Tsukanova is a 46-year-old mother who says her son, who joined the army in July, faced pressure to deploy to Ukraine despite earlier assurances that he would not have to. (An official says her son is serving inside Russia.)

After Mr Putin announced a “partial mobilisation” of recruits in September, Ms Tsukanova formed the Council of Mothers and Wives, which campaigns for better conditions for troops. Russian authorities have tolerated some criticism of the army’s incompetence in Ukraine. But there is little room for dissent in Mr Putin’s Russia: the government stifled opposition even before the invasion last February. Ms Tsukanova’s organisation has become a vehicle for broader anger over the military mobilisation—a stance that avoids a blatant anti-war message, but puts authorities in an awkward position.

To shut down the group would look bad, and Mr Putin clearly recognises the symbolic power of a soldier’s mother. In November he convened a televised meeting of women the Kremlin said were mothers of troops serving in Ukraine (all were sympathetic to the government). Ms Tsukanova rebuked Mr Putin for excluding her. The next month she was stopped by police. “They are afraid of us,” she declared.

This is not Ms Tsukanova’s first foray into politics. She once stood as a candidate for Volya, a party that was later banned. Its leader, Svetlana Lada-Rus, is a spiritual healer and noted conspiracy theorist who once ran for president of Russia. Now, Ms Tsukanova’s activism is complicated by her ties to another organisation affiliated with Ms Lada-Rus. The National Union of the Revival of Russia calls for the restoration of the Soviet Union and peddles anti-Semitic lies about the war’s origins. Ms Tsukanova’s council distributes that group’s conspiracy theories about covid-19 vaccines.

To confront Mr Putin’s regime, one must be either courageous or crazy. Ms Tsukanova may be both.

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Cryptic clues

1 down Bank initially gets 500 million in dodgy cash loans (7, 5)

1 across Country’s former currency (6)

2 across Tycoon is man trapped by technology (5)

3 across Old communist angrily votes “aye”, we’re told (6)

Factual clues

1 down Business once described as a “great vampire squid” (7, 5)

1 across A source of bauxite (6)

2 across Someone rapidly slipping down the world’s rich list (5)

3 across Union with a flourishing “second economy” (6)


Quiz winners

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Alastair Brockie, Stirling, Scotland

Remzi Silvia Mustafa, Krakow, Poland

Vincent H. Resh, El Cerrito, United States

They all gave the correct answers of Capri, zephyr, Thunderbirds, Taurus and Cortina d’Ampezzo. The theme is they are, or were, Ford car models.

To have a good brain the stomach must be cared for.

Nellie Bly
