The world in brief May 23, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 07:00 GMT+1 London 
Australia’s new PM in Tokyo and no concessions from Ukraine

Anthony Albanese was sworn in as Australia’s prime minister, his Labor party having defeated Scott Morrison’s ruling Liberal-National coalition at the ballot box on Saturday. The growing popularity of independent candidates means he may have to govern without a majority. Mr Albanese immediately promised to end his country’s “climate wars”, envisioning Australia as “a renewable-energy superpower”. He then sped to Japan for a summit of “the Quad”, an informal alliance aimed at containing China.

The leaders of the Quad—America, Australia, India and Japan—gathered in Tokyo to mull a range of possible security collaborations, from satellite orbits down to the South China Sea. China regards their grouping as “an Asian NATO”: not a compliment. From Guangzhou its foriegn minister, Wang Yi, said the Quad is “doomed to fail”. The Financial Times reported it will soon announce a joint initiative to monitor and curb China’s illegal fishing.

The Ukrainian government ruled out ever conceding territory to Russia as part of a ceasefire deal. On Sunday, Andrzej Duda, Poland’s president, told Ukraine’s parliament that only they should decide their future. He said they should disregard “disturbing voices appearing within Europe demanding that Ukraine should acknowledge the demands of Russia”. Russian forces intensified their attack on the Donbas region over the weekend.

Beijing reported its highest number of covid-19 cases during the current outbreak, triggering fears that China’s capital might yet be put under a lockdown. Meanwhile in Shanghai, where millions of residents have been stuck at home for weeks, new cases fell to a two-month low. In both cities, officials are trying frantically to adhere to a zero-covid policy.

The head of the World Health Organisation ranked monkeypox as one of the “formidable” challenges facing the world, alongside covid-19 and the war in Ukraine. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus made the remarks in Geneva, where experts convened to discuss the disease. More than 100 cases have been reported, mostly in Europe. But the virus is not very good at spreading, and existing vaccines can protect those at risk.

A colonel in the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps was assassinated in Tehran. The IRGC is a shadowy military agency controlled directly by Iran’s supreme leader (who outranks the president). Colonel Sayyad Khodai, who was reportedly shot by a team of two men on a motorbike, was part of a force that carried out operations abroad. No one has claimed responsibility for the attack; suspicions will fall on Israel.

An independent inquiry into sexual abuse in the Southern Baptist Convention, America’s largest Protestant denomination, found that high-ranking clergy denigrated victims and allowed alleged abusers to remain in their posts. A few leaders were “singularly focused on avoiding liability”, according to the report. The Baptists commissioned the third-party investigation after newspapers in Texas uncovered accusations against pastors in 2019.

Fact of the day: 47m, the number of additional people who could be driven into acute food insecurity by the war in Ukraine. 