The world in brief
July 20, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Russia’s defence ministry said that all ships bound for Ukraine’s Black Sea ports would be considered “potential carriers of military cargo” starting at midnight on Thursday. Earlier Ukraine said that Russian strikes on ports in Odessa and Chornomorsk, both in southern Ukraine, had destroyed 60,000 tonnes of grain. The price of wheat futures jumped by more than 8% on Wednesday. On Monday Russia withdrew from a deal that had allowed Ukraine to export grain through Black Sea.

Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, will not attend the BRICS summit in Johannesburg in August, according to the South African hosts. Had Mr Putin attended, as a signatory to the International Criminal Court South Africa would be obliged to arrest him; the court issued an arrest warrant for Russia's president in March. The country’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, on Tuesday asked the ICC for permission to not arrest Mr Putin.

Netflix added 5.9m paid subscribers in the second quarter, a result of efforts to root out password-sharing. Revenues grew by nearly 3% year over year, to $8.2bn; net income was $1.5bn. The streaming giant said it would have $1.5bn more in free cash flow this year than anticipated owing to the Hollywood strike and reduced spending on content.

Tesla said that quarterly revenues rose by 47% year on year, to $24.9bn, beating expectations. Net income was $2.7bn. Deliveries leapt by 83% from the same period a year ago. But the carmaker’s operating margins fell by nearly two percentage points from the first quarter of 2023, to 9.6%, partly owing to price cuts.

Goldman Sachs, an American bank, reported second-quarter earnings of $1.1bn, down from $2.8bn a year earlier, and its worst showing in three years. The bank suffered from a slowdown in trading and a round of layoffs this year. Several parts of Goldman's portfolio have seen their valuation slump, including GreenSky, an online lender it purchased in 2021.

Thailand’s parliament voted to block the installation of Pita Limjaroenrat, the leader of the pro-democracy Move Forward party, to the role of prime minister. Mr Pita won the most votes in a general election in May, but has failed to secure the support of lawmakers. Thailand’s generals, who appoint senators to parliament, have made continued attempts to suppress the country’s democracy.

The World Health Organization said that heatwaves scorching large parts of America, Asia and Europe are putting pressure on health systems. In Europe alerts for high temperatures remained in place in Italy, Spain and several parts of the Balkans. In Beijing—where Xi Jinping, the president, held climate talks with John Kerry, President Joe Biden’s climate envoy—temperatures remained higher than 35°C for the 28th consecutive day.

Figure of the day: 92%, the proportion of Russians that to some extent followed Wagner’s aborted coup, according to the Levada Centre, an independent pollster. Read the full story.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
A slow economic retreat in Turkey
Turkey’s freshly re-elected president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, has promised a return to “rational” economic policies. Before the vote in spring, he bloated the economy with cheap credit, which pushed up inflation and burned through foreign-currency reserves. But investors gushed over his subsequent appointment of two former Wall Street bankers to run the central bank and the treasury, expecting them to stave off a full-blown currency crisis.

That cheer was short-lived; economists realised that the return to orthodoxy will be slow. The central-bank governor, Hafize Gaye Erkan, barely dented the gap between interest rates and inflation when she lifted rates by 6.5 percentage points to 15% in June. She is expected to raise them modestly again on Thursday.

Market pessimism has shaved a quarter off the Turkish lira’s value since Mr Erdogan won a run-off vote in May. Ms Erkan and Mehmet Simsek, the treasury and finance minister, may know how to fix the problem, but the domineering Mr Erdogan has to let them.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Mayhem in America’s military appointments
In 2019, Timothy Haugh, an American military officer, received his third star (conferring the title of Lieutenant General) just six weeks after he was awarded his second. On Thursday Lieutenant General Haugh, who has been nominated to lead the National Security Agency and Cyber Command, appears before the Senate’s Armed Service Committee. He should not expect such a speedy promotion this time.

Pentagon appointments are usually confirmed briskly in batches by unanimous consent of the Senate. But Tommy Tuberville, a Republican senator from Alabama, has issued a blanket “hold” on confirming top military leadership, in protest against the Pentagon’s policy of paying the travel expenses of servicewomen seeking abortions.

About 650 nominations of generals and flag officers are liable to be stymied by the end of the year. Democrats accuse the senator of harming military readiness and morale. Some Republicans have tried to talk Mr Tuberville out of his hold, worried it could make their party appear more interested in fighting the culture wars than preparing for real ones.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Yellen’s supply-chain sojourn in Vietnam
America’s treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, is in Hanoi on Thursday, for meetings with Pham Minh Chinh, Vietnam’s prime minister, and Ho Duc Phoc, the finance minister, as well as other economic policymakers. The trip is part of America’s efforts to encourage “friendshoring”: moving vital supply chains to countries with which the American government has a strong relationship, particularly to reduce commercial links with China.

Vietnam doesn’t need too much encouragement. It is home to production sites for American companies such as Microsoft and Intel; it supplies a growing number of components for Apple’s products. That makes it a lynchpin of America’s effort to diversify trade links. Its manufacturing prowess has sent it up the ranks of American trade partners in recent years. Americans imported $128bn-worth of goods and services from Vietnam in 2022, surpassing South Korea’s $115bn. Still, it is a long way from the top: America’s imports from China were $537bn.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
By-election blues for Britain’s Tories
Rishi Sunak has had a run of rare good news this week. Inflation, the British prime minister’s biggest headache, fell more sharply than expected in June. Meanwhile, Tata Group, the parent company of Jaguar Land Rover, announced it would open a vast car-battery factory in Britain. Neither of those boosts may be enough, however, to spare Mr Sunak a painful encounter with the ballot box.

On Thursday three by-elections take place in England following the resignation of MPs from Mr Sunak’s Conservative Party. Uxbridge and South Ruislip in west London was vacated by the disgraced former prime minister, Boris Johnson. Selby and Ainsty in North Yorkshire was abandoned by his ally, Nigel Adams. Somerton and Frome was the seat of David Warburton, who resigned in a scandal. The last prime minister to lose three by-elections in one day was Harold Wilson in 1968. Still, as a cabinet minister says, expectations for Mr Sunak are so low that the party just needs to hold on to one seat to claim a victory of sorts.


PHOTO: AP
The Women’s World Cup kicks off
The eight editions of the Women’s World Cup have produced just four winners: America (four titles), Germany (two), Norway and Japan. Although America and Germany are strong contenders at the ninth tournament, which begins on Thursday in New Zealand, several sides are confident they can clinch their first victory.

England prevailed at the European Championships last year, but injuries have robbed them of their captain, Leah Williamson, and their best attacking player, Beth Mead. Spain, which can draw from the ranks of Barcelona, a dominant club, is missing 12 players who refuse to play under their unpopular coach, Jorge Vilda. The France squad has also seen player unrest, prompting the axing of its manager, Corinne Diacre, in March. Her successor, Hervé Renard, is experienced in the men’s game, but has never coached a women’s side. Finally, Australia are in great form and have one of the world’s best strikers in Sam Kerr. Yet this year’s co-hosts have never been past the quarter-finals.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which branch of the armed services is often referred to in Britain as the “senior service”?

Wednesday: A horse with a coat consisting of patches of white and other colours is known in America by what name?

You never know what worse luck your bad luck has saved you from.

Cormac McCarthy
