The world in brief
July 19, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Michigan’s attorney-general charged 16 people with eight felony counts each for attempting to hand the state’s electoral votes to Donald Trump in America’s 2020 election. The “false electors” wrongly certified that Mr Trump had won in Michigan; in fact Joe Biden prevailed there by about three percentage points. Earlier Mr Trump said federal prosecutors had warned him that he is a “target” of their investigation into his efforts to overturn the 2020 election. Such letters often precede indictment.

An American soldier was detained by North Korea after crossing into the country without permission, according to the United Nations Command, a body responsible for upholding the armistice that ended fighting in the Korean war. He was touring the Joint Security Area, a section of the demilitarised zone where UNC forces interact with their North Korean counterparts.

Morgan Stanley, an American bank, reported a 14% drop in second-quarter profit. The firm suffered from a decline in trading revenue. Higher interest rates dried up the flow of initial public offerings and merger deals. Nevertheless, its wealth management results were higher than expected at $6.7bn, up from $5.7bn a year earlier. Shares ticked up in early trading.

Heatwaves and wildfires continued to scorch large parts of the northern hemisphere. Phoenix, Arizona, endured a 19th consecutive day of temperatures above 43°C—a record among big American cities. Meanwhile fires broke out in Greece and Spain. Tens of thousands of people were evacuated in southern China and Vietnam to escape a big typhoon hitting the region.

South Africa’s president said that arresting Vladimir Putin, should he come to Johannesburg for a summit in August, would be like declaring “war” against Russia. As a party to the International Criminal Court, which earlier issued a warrant for Mr Putin’s arrest, South Africa has an obligation to detain the Russian president; Cyril Ramaphosa appears inclined to ignore it.

An Egyptian court sentenced Patrick Zaki, a researcher, to three years in prison, according to the NGO he worked for. Mr Zaki was first arrested for an article he wrote about the plights of Coptic Christians, the country’s religious minority, in 2020. His case drew international attention. Several Italian cities conferred Mr Zaki, who had been studying there, with honorary citizenship. There are around 65,000 political prisoners in Egypt.

Russia raised the maximum age at which men can be called up to the reserves by at least five years. Depending on their position, men who have completed their service can now be mobilised up to age 70. Russia also raised the upper limit of the draft age from 27 to 30. Russia’s defence minister has said he wants to increase the number of soldiers in service from 1.15m to 1.5m.

Figure of the day: 21.3%, the jobless rate among urban youth in China. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Tesla hits speed bumps
Tesla’s first cybertruck, a futuristic rendering of the all-American pickup, rolled off production lines just days ago. But now Elon Musk’s electric-vehicle company must return to more mundane concerns. Tesla is in a race with the rest of the car industry; its second-quarter results, due on Wednesday, will show how it is faring.


Investors will watch for Tesla’s operating margins, which last year were around 17%, a stratospheric figure next to those of older, clunkier car-makers. Tesla prides itself on doing things differently from its established rivals. But slowing growth in demand and rising inventories forced it to start slashing prices late last year. The subsequent pace of price-cutting by Tesla and its competitors has accelerated quickly. China’s government recently demanded the company and its Chinese rivals sign a letter promising to respect “core socialist values” and compete fairly. Margins may slip below the first quarter’s 11%, closer to the performance of conventional firms Tesla once left trailing.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Thailand’s possible PM tries again
On Wednesday Thailand’s parliament is due to vote—again—on installing a new prime minister. It is the second attempt by Pita Limjaroenrat, a young liberal, to claim the post and end nine years of military rule. His pro-democracy Move Forward party scooped the most votes in a general election in May, but he failed to win a parliamentary ballot on July 13th. Despite the backing of an eight-party alliance, he will probably fail again, because he poses an existential threat to those voting.

Mr Pita wants to dismantle Thailand’s monarcho-military establishment, which is now firmly rallied against him. Of the 249 senators in parliament, appointed by the army, only 13 voted for him the first time. That number is unlikely to change much. Meanwhile, the country’s subservient judiciary is toying with disbarring him from office—presumably at the behest of his opponents. Thailand still has a long way to go before the public is guaranteed to get the leaders it votes for.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Britain’s inflexible inflation
British inflation data for June are published on Wednesday. Recent readings have indicated that inflation is stickier in Britain than in comparable countries. Most worrying for the Bank of England, sub-indices have shown that price growth is particularly strong in services. That is despite falls in the headline rate of inflation since its peak in October, thanks to lower fuel costs and a slowing rate in the increase of prices for food. Traders are now predicting that the central bank will raise interest rates further and faster than previously planned, and are betting on them hitting or exceeding 6% by February.

Economists expect that the figures for June will, broadly, tell the same story. The producer price index, which measures the cost of products leaving factories, has fallen sharply over the past year, suggesting disinflationary pressures. Nominal wage growth, though, has remained strong, suggesting that inflation is becoming more embedded in services, which are more labour-intensive. High prices are proving hard to shake.


PHOTO: AP
Unrest continues in Peru
Peruvians plan to take to the streets of Lima again on Wednesday. It will be their third big march in the capital since December, when Pedro Castillo, the president, was arrested after trying to dissolve Congress to prevent his own impeachment. Protesters are expected to demand the removal of Dina Boluarte, Mr Castillo’s successor and former deputy, the bringing forward of general elections scheduled for 2026 and the drafting of a new constitution.

At first the protests were mainly supportive of Mr Castillo. Yet the crowd changed after Ms Boluarte blamed the insurrection on terrorist groups, without evidence. The ensuing crackdown by police and the military left over 60 people dead. In June, when another protest was announced, Ms Boluarte asked, “How many more deaths do they want?” and swore to stick around until 2026. But her approval rating has recently dropped to just 14%. Her road ahead looks rocky.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
England try to level the Ashes
The men’s Ashes, a best-of-five Test-cricket series between England and Australia, has so far produced three close matches. They have been played at a frenetic pace and packed with controversy. Australia lead the series by two to one. That means England need to win the fourth match, which begins on Wednesday in Manchester, to stop their opponents retaining the Ashes.

The drama is a boon for broadcasters. Sky Sports, which owns the British TV rights, recorded its highest-ever average viewing figures for a Test during the third game, at 965,000. But that is lower than the average of around 2.5m that watched the Ashes in 2005, when Test cricket was last broadcast on free-to-air TV. The England and Wales Cricket Board argued that putting cricket behind a paywall would help secure the sport’s financial future. Yet other bodies, like Cricket Australia, opted to keep home Test matches free to view. The old foes have different styles in more ways than one.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: A horse with a coat consisting of patches of white and other colours is known in America by what name?

Tuesday: Which is the most valuable ball in the game of snooker?

Everyone has talent at 25. The difficulty is to have it at 50.

Edgar Degas
