The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (03:02 GMT+1 / 10:02 Hong Kong)

France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, has lost his parliamentary majority according to near-final results in elections to the 577-seat National Assembly. His centrist alliance will still emerge as the largest party, but lost dozens of seats. A left-wing alliance was poised to become the biggest opposition group, but the far right is on the verge of a record-breaking 85-90 seats, up from eight in the last election.

Russia said that its attack on the city of Severodonetsk in eastern Ukraine was going according to plan, and claimed to have captured the settlement of Metyolkine on the eastern fringe of the city. Meanwhile, Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary-general, warned that the war could last for “years”. Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said his country “will definitely win” the war against Russia during a visit to the southern frontline.

Colombians elected Gustavo Petro, a leftist ex-guerrilla, as their president. Mr Petro beat Rodolfo Hernández, a former construction tycoon, by a wider margin than polls had predicted, with 50.5% of the vote to Mr Hernández's 47.3%. Mr Petro, a former mayor of Bogotá, the capital, has been a congressman for decades. He has pledged to make university education free and ban new oil and gas projects, but will need to work with a fragmented Congress.

FINA, swimming’s world governing body, voted to restrict the participation of transgender athletes in women’s events. From Monday, only swimmers who have transitioned before the age of 12 will be allowed to compete in them. The new rule most prominently bars Lia Thomas—who in March became the first transgender woman to win an American college swimming championship—from participating as a woman at the Olympics.

China’s e-commerce giant JD.com posted its lowest ever sales growth in one of the country’s biggest shopping festivals, “618”. Over the 18-day period to Sunday, sales rose by just 10.3% compared with 27.7% during the equivalent period last year. The figures confirm fears that consumer confidence in China has been badly shaken by extended covid-19 lockdowns, as well as slowing economic conditions.

Ireland’s taoiseach (or prime minister) said that Britain’s plans to scrap part of the post-Brexit trade deal it reached with the EU concerning Northern Ireland amounted to “economic vandalism”. Michael Martin argued that Britain’s plan, set out in a bill presented to parliament last Monday, was “unilateralism of the worst kind”. The EU is taking legal action against Britain over the bill.

Large protests took place in Tunis against a constitutional referendum called by President Kais Saied for July 25th. Opponents of the Tunisian president argue that his proposed changes would move the country further towards one-man rule. The protests followed similar demonstrations on Saturday and a nationwide strike on Thursday. Opposition parties say they will boycott the referendum.

Fact of the day: 13%, manufacturing’s share of GDP across the OECD club of mostly rich countries, an all-time low. Read the full article

A vicious circle of inflationary expectations

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Economists expect that the global surge in inflation will soon come to an end. The general public are not so sure. A worldwide measure of people’s inflation expectations over the next year was more than 4% in May, up from 2.3% a year ago. Other measures of inflation expectations seem to be growing, too. The worry is that these beliefs will start feeding into actual economic behaviour—wage demands, say, or pricing decisions—thus feeding the inflationary beast.

Indeed, central banks may have difficulty getting inflation expectations down again. After decades of low and stable inflation, few people pay much attention to what Jerome Powell, Christine Lagarde or Andrew Bailey say, or even know who they are. History offers some lessons. In the 1980s Paul Volcker, chairman of the Federal Reserve, cultivated his image as an anti-inflation nutter. Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher were known for their anti-inflationary zeal. Perhaps it’s time for inflation to be named public enemy number once again.


China delves deeper into Africa

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Signs that China is tentatively revising its cherished doctrine of “non-interference” can be seen in the Horn of Africa. On Monday a “peace conference” kicks off in Addis Ababa, the capital of Ethiopia, organised by China after its appointment of a special envoy to the region, which is racked by ethnic, territorial and resource-driven conflicts, including a war between Ethiopia’s federal government and the rebellious region of Tigray.

China has said very little about what it wants to achieve, other than to tackle the challenges of “security, development and governance”. Protecting its considerable economic investments in the region is probably its main concern. But China is unlikely to attempt to mediate directly in Ethiopia’s civil war. Rebel groups are not invited. Eritrea—a major source of the region’s instability—is unlikely to attend. In all, it is doubtful the conference will address the root causes of the Horn’s instability.

The latest cycle of gerrymandering comes to an end

PHOTO: ALAMY
Monday is the deadline for Louisiana to submit a new map of its Congressional districts. A federal judge rejected the state’s previous proposal—passed by the Republican legislature over the veto of the Democratic governor—when it was found to violate the voting-rights act by not including enough black-majority districts. Louisiana is the only state left without a map for the midterm elections in November. Once approved, America’s contentious redistricting cycle will finally end.

After the decennial census in 2020, Democrats and Republicans competed to redraw Congressional boundaries in their favour, a process known as gerrymandering. Courts attempted to block more egregious efforts—sometimes, as in Louisiana, to avoid the marginalisation of racial minorities. In some states, like Ohio, Republicans simply ignored the courts. Across the country as a whole, the partisan balance has remained stable, but the number of competitive districts has dwindled. The Supreme Court may rule next year to expand the ability of states to gerrymander. Voters look set to be stuck with still more extreme candidates.

Sri Lanka seeks help from the IMF

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
These days Sri Lanka often looks deserted. The most active people are officials scrambling to emergency meetings. Public transport has ground to a halt. From Monday, schools and state-run offices will be shut for two weeks. Fridays have been declared a public holiday in a bid to conserve fuel. With rolling blackouts and a lack of medicines, the country confronts a humanitarian crisis. Food prices have soared as farmers plough through an acute shortage of fertilisers.

A delegation from the International Monetary Fund will visit Colombo, the capital, on Monday to discuss a rescue package. On May 22nd Sri Lanka defaulted on its debt for the first time ever. High energy prices and the covid-19 pandemic contributed to the worst economic crisis in seven decades, but so too did the country’s own economic mismanagement. Last week the central-bank governor admitted that the government could have gone to the IMF sooner. Better late than never.

Nobel prize auction for Ukraine

PHOTO: EYEVINE
After Russia invaded Finland in 1939, Niels Bohr, a Danish physicist, donated his Nobel-prize medal to aid Finnish civilians. More than 80 years later, he has inspired another laureat to follow suit. On Monday, Russian journalist and last year’s peace-prize winner, Dmitry Muratov, will auction his 23-karat gold token to help Ukrainian refugees. The starting price is $550,000, but higher bids are expected. Another medal belonging to Francis Crick, a molecular biologist, fetched $2.3m in 2013.

Mr Muratov has already done much to oppose his government. His independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta has for decades investigated corruption and human-rights abuses in Russia. Founded on a small budget in 1993, the publication was boosted with the last Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev’s own Nobel-prize money. Six of its journalists have been murdered since 2000. It kept going—until March, when it suspended operations as the Kremlin muffled media critical of its war.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Which performer in the Star Wars movies was the daughter of Debbie Reynolds, an actress and singer?

Vote for the man who promises least; he’ll be the least disappointing”.

Bernard Baruch
