The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (22:49 GMT+1 / 05:49 Hong Kong)

Britain recorded one of its hottest days ever on Monday, with temperatures reaching 38°C. They were expected to climb higher still on Tuesday, to 41°C. Over the weekend wildfires ravaged southern France, Portugal, Spain and north Africa, as well as parts of Croatia, Greece, Italy and Turkey. Temperatures soared above 45°C in several places, intensifying fears about climate change. Thousands of people have been evacuated from their homes in the French department of Gironde, in Spain’s province of Málaga and in parts of Morocco.

Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, met with Azerbaijan’s president, Ilham Aliev, to sign a new agreement on energy supplies. The agreement commits to double gas deliveries from Azerbaijan to the EU, as it looks to wean itself from Russian supplies. The leaders also agreed to expand support for Azerbaijan’s renewable-energy sector and help it reduce its methane emissions.

Goldman Sachs reported that net income in the second quarter fell by 47% from the same period a year ago, to $2.9bn. Its investment-banking revenues dropped by 41% amid a drought of public listings, though stockmarket volatility boosted trading revenues by 32%. Goldman said it would slow hiring and possibly resume culling underperformers, a practice it had abandoned in the pandemic.

Ghana confirmed two cases of the Marburg virus, a highly contagious disease similar to Ebola. It is only the second time the illness has been detected in West Africa. The announcement followed tests by the World Health Organisation on samples from two patients who died in late June. Over 90 of their contacts are being monitored by health authorities.

Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, said he would call a vote on a $52bn package of subsidies to American chipmakers as soon as Tuesday. Two years in the making, the legislation was prompted by concerns that China’s semiconductor industry has raced ahead of America’s. Senators are expected to vote on a pared-down version of the bill: other provisions related to American competitiveness vis-à-vis China, such as grants for science research, were scrapped.

Euromoney, a British financial news company, accepted a takeover bid of around $2bn from private equity groups Astorg and Epiris, a rare take-private deal amidst economic uncertainty. If accepted by shareholders, the deal will see the business split into two, with Astorg taking Euromoney’s price-reporting division and Epiris taking the rest.

At least 20 people died and another 30 went missing after a boat capsized in the Indus river in Pakistan. The boat, which was carrying over 100 people, was travelling to a wedding. Its passengers were mostly women and children. Divers have rescued more than 90 passengers so far, according to officials.

Fact of the day: £30.5bn, the opening market capitalisation of Haleon, the largest new entrant on the London Stock Exchange since 2011. Read the full article.

Europe’s deadly heat

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Tuesday temperatures in some parts of Britain may hit a record-breaking 40°C. Things are even worse elsewhere in Europe, where a severe heatwave has sparked enormous wildfires in Greece, Portugal and Spain. Central and southern parts of America are enduring a historically hot summer, too. And last week cities in eastern and southern China saw unusually high temperatures.

Heatwaves are becoming more frequent, and worse, because of climate change. They are also more likely to happen simultaneously across countries. This could be because it is hotter everywhere: with each fraction of a degree of global warming, temperature spikes become more extreme. Or it might be because climate change is altering the jet stream—the name given to air currents that snake through the upper atmosphere—though the link is not yet clear. Either way, more and more people are struggling with high temperatures that they are not prepared for. Many thousands will die.

Putin and Erdogan in Iran

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The presidents of Russia and Turkey are in Iran on Tuesday to discuss the war in Syria. All three countries are involved in the conflict, and all want it to end. Russia’s Vladimir Putin and Iran’s Ebrahim Raisi, backers of the Syrian government, will offer each other firm support. The role of Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s leader, is more complicated: Turkey backs opposition forces in Syria, although it has often sought Russia’s consent to launch armed offensives against Kurdish insurgents based in the country’s north. Mr Erdogan is currently planning another such operation, but this time Russia and Iran want him to stop.

The leaders may also discuss Ukraine, where their relationship is equally tangled. Turkey has sold drones to Ukraine, while Iran reportedly plans to help arm Russia. And Mr Erdogan hopes to help avert a global food crisis by creating a safe naval corridor for grain exports through the Black Sea; Russia has been blockading Ukraine’s ports. In Tehran the Turkish president hopes to persuade Mr Putin to agree to a deal. For this tense trio, though, that will not be easy.


Seeking answers in Aspen

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America’s security and foreign-policy elite gathers in Colorado on Tuesday for the Aspen Security Forum, a four-day talkfest about the gloomy state of a fast-changing world. Attendees include Jake Sullivan, Joe Biden’s national security advisor, and William Burns, the head of the CIA. Much has changed since their virtual meeting last year, when the Taliban did not yet rule Afghanistan, Russia had not yet invaded Ukraine and inflation had not yet rocketed.

These new challenges provoke many questions, but few clear answers. Can America help beat back Russia’s invasion? Can it hold the line against China in Asia? Can its economy thrive amid the disruptions of war, covid and high energy prices? Indeed, can America revitalise its own democracy given polarisation at home? Defeating Russia could provide new confidence. But a long war looms in Ukraine, and after the mid-term elections in November, America’s Congress may tire of providing tens of billions of dollars’ worth of arms and aid. The Aspen crowd has its work cut out.

Netflix’s big cliffhanger

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The last instalment of Netflix’s earnings, in April, shocked shareholders. Not only had the company lost 200,000 subscribers in the first quarter, but bosses warned it was likely to shed 2m more in the second, around 1% of total subscribers. That news sparked a share-price crash and left investors on the edge of their seats. On Tuesday the cliffhanger will end as the company reports its second-quarter earnings—and investors will learn just how many subscribers have left.

Netflix is working on a revival plan, including a subscription tier with adverts, which it thinks could boost revenues. Hoping to increase the number of subscribers, bosses are trying to crack down on the sharing of passwords. But as inflation grows and consumers cut back on spending, Netflix faces an uphill battle. It will have to make its own spending cuts too. That makes the release of “The Gray Man” this week rather awkward. With a budget of $200m, it is Netflix’s most expensive film yet.

Bye-bye to the mystery of “American Pie”

PHOTO: AP
When Don McLean’s ubiquitous folk anthem, “American Pie”, starts to play, fans know they are in for nearly nine minutes of cryptic references to rock ‘n’ roll history, the Vietnam war and America itself. The song, which hit number one in 1972, captured several generations: it has over 500m plays on Spotify. To celebrate its 50th anniversary, a documentary released on Paramount+ on Tuesday explores the song’s influence—and its mysterious lyrics.

In “The Day the Music Died” Mr McLean, who has long been cagey about the meanings in the lyrics, recalls he wrote all its verses in just one hour. That might explain why, disappointingly, the lyrics are revealed to be less interesting than fans might like. The “Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost” refers to the actual Holy Trinity; not, as some have speculated, John F. Kennedy, Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King. Bob Dylan is not “the jester” and Elvis is not “the king”. Listeners searching for meaning will come up as dry as Mr McLean’s levee.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which heiress was kidnapped by the Symbionese Liberation Army in 1974?

Monday: Which legendary drummer died at the age of 80 last year?

There is a kind of success that is indistinguishable from panic.

Edgar Degas
