The world in brief
April 8, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A federal judge in Texas suspended the approval of mifepristone, an abortion pill that has been in use in America since 2000. The judge stayed his own order for seven days, meaning it will not immediately go into effect to allow time for appeals. In a separate case, a judge in Washington state ruled that the drug was safe and effective. The conflicting rulings will likely end up in the Supreme Court—which last year ended the constitutional right to an abortion.

Israeli fighter jets struck parts of Lebanon and Gaza that Israel’s armed forces claim are linked to Hamas, a militant Islamist group. The attacks were a response to a barrage of rockets launched from southern Lebanon towards northern Israel on Thursday—the largest single such bombardment since the Lebanon war in 2006. Palestinian groups in Gaza launched several rockets towards Israel, according to Israel’s armed forces. The violence followed a second Israeli police raid on Jerusalem’s al-Aqsa mosque.

Hiring growth in America slowed somewhat in March as employers added 236,000 jobs, the smallest monthly gain since December 2020. Average hourly wages rose by 4.2% year on year, near a two-year low. A recent uptick in unemployment claims and fall in vacancies add to the impression that the labour market is cooling—welcome news to the Federal Reserve, which makes its next interest-rate decision in May.

Evan Gershkovich, the Wall Street Journal reporter detained last week by Russia, has been formally charged with espionage, according to Russian media. He denies the allegations. Earlier the Democratic and Republican leaders of America’s Senate condemned Russia’s actions in a joint statement, describing the charges as “fabricated”. A hearing for Mr Gershkovich’s case is scheduled in Moscow on April 18th.

Poland said it would temporarily halt imports of Ukrainian grain amid Polish farmers’ anger about increased supply and depressed prices. Shipments destined for other countries will still be allowed in. After war broke out in Ukraine, much of its grain production was rerouted through Poland, raising local farmers’ ire and forcing the previous agriculture minister’s resignation.

In a joint statement, the governments of France and China promised to deepen military dialogue and called for peace in Ukraine. The statement came as Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, concluded an optimistic visit to China. Yet Ursula von der Leyen, the head of the European Commission, had far less amicable talks with Xi Jinping, China’s president, which touched on the future of Taiwan.

The value of Dogecoin, a cryptocurrency created as a joke in 2013, fell by 9% on news that some Twitter users were no longer seeing its cartoon-dog meme. Earlier this week Twitter’s familiar blue-bird logo was inexplicably jettisoned in favour of a Shiba Inu dog adopted by the memecoin, for which Elon Musk, the billionaire owner of the social-media site, has long had a fondness. Mr Musk’s endless antics have left Twitter’s users dog-tired.

Word of the week: britva, “razor” in Montenegrin, and the nickname for the Balkan country’s long-time (and politically sharp) leader, Milo Djukanovic, who finally lost the presidency on April 2nd. Read the full story here.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
New leadership at the Bank of Japan
A new era at the Bank of Japan begins on Saturday as Ueda Kazuo takes over from Kuroda Haruhiko as governor. During his decade in charge Mr Kuroda unleashed unprecedented monetary stimulus, aiming to get inflation up to 2%. He leaves his successor a host of dilemmas.

Wary of tipping the economy into recession, the BoJ has maintained its loose monetary policy, even as inflation has breached 4%, a 41-year high. But as investors have speculated on coming policy changes, the BoJ has had to buy up record amounts of bonds to defend its “yield-curve-control” (YCC) policy, which caps long-term government-bond yields.

Mr Ueda, an academic, is known as a balanced pragmatist rather than a dogmatic hawk or dove. During his confirmation hearings he called the BoJ’s current framework “appropriate”. Yet observers expect some tweaks to the YCC policy in the coming months. In leading the bank through such changes, Mr Ueda is taking on one of the toughest jobs in central banking.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Picasso in the spotlight, and under the microscope
Get ready for the great Picassopalooza. The 50th anniversary of Pablo Picasso’s death, which falls on Saturday, marks the official launch of a wave of exhibitions around the world reappraising the most influential artist of the 20th century. At Musée Picasso in Paris, Paul Smith, a British fashion designer, hangs the Spanish master’s paintings alongside work by contemporary artists, such as Chéri Samba from the Democratic Republic of Congo. The Musée de l’Homme, also in the French capital, will display a selection of the bones he amassed in his studio that inspired some of his abstract paintings in the 1930s, while the Museu del Disseny de Barcelona will showcase his ceramic work.

The most controversial will probably be “Celebration Picasso” at the Brooklyn Museum in New York. It deals with thorny issues of misogyny, masculinity and artistic genius. One of the curators, the Australian comedian and art historian Hannah Gadsby, pulls no punches. Picasso “suffered from the mental illness of misogyny”, the curator declares. “I hate him.”


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Fat puts the flavour in fake meat
The fake-meat industry is flagging. Most plant-based options come only in the form of patties. One ingredient that is missing, as any butcher worth his salt will tell you, is fat tissue. Fat in cooked meat releases hundreds of savoury compounds. But efforts to cultivate fat in the lab have stalled: without an animal’s network of blood vessels to nourish the tissue, it dies.

Now researchers writing in eLife, a journal, have devised a simple workaround. Instead of growing a great fatty lump, they cultivated mouse- and pig-fat cells in two-dimensional sheets, and then used a binding agent to layer them together. The process, the authors claim, can be scaled up, and the lipid balance tweaked to create fats of different texture and flavour. If they are right, fake meat might be about to move beyond processed burgers and nuggets to a new era of marbled steaks and streaky bacon.


PHOTO: COURTESY OF AI WEIWEI STUDIO
Ai Weiwei’s art comes to London
Fans of Ai Weiwei may fear that, at 66, the Chinese artist might be running out of ideas. Not at all. His latest show—“Making Sense”, which opened at the Design Museum in London this week—suggests that the artist and dissident is as sharp as ever.

The exhibition is about history, memory and destruction. Visitors enter through the timber frame of a Qing dynasty merchant’s demolished house, repurposed as a gateway in tangerine, pink and sky blue. On the floor of the exhibition stretch “rugs” of Neolithic flints, porcelain cannon balls and shards of blue glazed pottery smashed when Mr Ai’s studio in Beijing was destroyed by Chinese authorities in 2018. The show attests to the ways in which humans make, and remake, things. A vast panorama based on “Water Lilies”, a series of paintings by Claude Monet, a French impressionist, stretches across one wall. On close inspection, onlookers will note it is made of Lego.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Weekend profile: Maria Lvova-Belova, a Kremlin official dubbed Putin’s “child-snatcher”
Neat blonde hair, elegant jewellery, often flocked by children—Maria Lvova-Belova looks more school headmistress than alleged war criminal. But in March the International Criminal Court issued arrest warrants for both Russia’s commissioner of children’s rights and her boss, President Vladimir Putin. The court alleges that they bear responsibility for the “unlawful transfer” of Ukrainian infants from Russian-occupied territories into Russia.

This week Ms Lvova-Belova called the indictment a “farce without specifics”. Yet researchers from Yale University suggest that, since the war began, at least 6,000 Ukrainian children have been deported to camps in Russia and Crimea, the peninsula it annexed in 2014. (Ukraine’s government puts the figure at more than 16,000.) Many of the facilities aim to instil a Russo-centric worldview into the youngsters, according to the Yale study. And reports of forced adoption are rife.

The allegations contrast with the 38-year-old’s image as a paragon of family values. A devout Orthodox Christian, she is married to a priest, who left a career as a computer programmer to take the cloth. By some counts, they are parents to more than 20 children, including adoptees and foster wards. (The Kremlin, though, describes Ms Lvova-Belova as a mere mother-of-ten.)

Ms Lvova-Belova studied orchestral conducting in her hometown, Penza, a city south-east of Moscow, before working as a guitar teacher. In 2008 she co-founded “Blagovest”, a group that helped disadvantaged children, later establishing several other charities. She dabbled in local politics and was elected to Penza’s city assembly in 2019. But she stepped aside for another candidate preferred by her—and Mr Putin’s—party, United Russia. It proved a shrewd move. She was rewarded with a senior party position and, in 2020, a seat as a senator representing Penza in the upper house of Russia’s parliament. She became children’s commissioner in 2021.

Despite international condemnation, Ms Lvova-Belova seems proud of her work. In February, she revealed her own adoption of a 15-year-old boy from Mariupol, an occupied city in south-east Ukraine. He is possibly number 23 in her flock.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Agreement to say hello or farewell outside terminal of air line (4, 6)

1 across Gang ran deliveries smuggling £1000 (5)

2 across Illness with unknown mutation (4)

3 across Toy gun mostly silly or immature (5)

Factual clues

1 down An agreement signed in 1998 (4, 6)

1 across The type of jury that indicted Donald Trump (5)

2 across State which the electricity grid is constantly in (4)

3 across People voting with their feet on education (5)



The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Ingo Schwanke, Russell, Manitoba, Canada
Grace Antony, Chennai, India
Rachel Zweig, Fayetteville, Arkansas, America

They gave the correct answers: The Colosseum, Louvre Museum, Shakespeare sonnet, Mickey Mouse and the Tower of Pisa. The theme is that they all appear in the first list of comparisons in “You’re the Top”, a song by Cole Porter

The questions:
Monday: Which famous landmark, in the centre of Rome, was also known as the Flavian Amphitheatre?
Tuesday: In what well-known site can tourists see the Mona Lisa and the Venus de Milo?
Wednesday: “Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore” and “No longer mourn for me when I am dead” are the first lines of which forms of poetry by which author?
Thursday: Which cartoon character originally appeared in a film called “Steamboat Willie”?
Friday: Which landmark, which took nearly 200 years to build, was used by Galileo to test his theory that the speed of descent was independent of an object’s mass?

Peace is never a perfect achievement.

Kofi Annan
