The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 16, 2023
Switzerland’s central bank said it would provide liquidity to Credit Suisse “if necessary” after its share price plunged by 24%. Triggering Wednesday’s sell-off was a statement by Credit Suisse’s largest shareholder, Saudi National Bank, ruling out more investment. On Tuesday Switzerland’s second-largest bank said that depositor outflows had stabilised but “not yet reversed”. In the last quarter of 2022 customers withdrew SFr111bn ($122bn).

Worries about banks’ stability ricocheted throughout the sector and beyond. First Republic, a mid-tier American lender, shed a fifth of its market value after S&P Global Ratings downgraded its credit rating to “junk”. The yield on the two-year Treasury approached a six-month low amid demand for safe-haven assets. Judging by interest-rate futures, investors think that the Federal Reserve will keep rates unchanged later this month.

In his spring budget Britain’s chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, said corporate tax will rise from 19% to 25%. Companies will be able to offset the increase with domestic capital investments. He offered an unexpected pension boost and expanded free childcare. The OBR, the country’s fiscal watchdog, forecast that Britain is set to avoid a “technical recession”, two successive quarters without GDP growth, this year.

The IMF is reportedly prepared to announce a four-year loan worth $15.6bn for Ukraine as early as this week. A fund official said that “very good progress” had been made in their negotiations. Ukraine, foreseeing a budget deficit of $38bn this year, has already secured $28bn in aid from America and the EU.

China’s economy is recovering after the lifting of covid-19 restrictions late last year. Industrial output in January and February was 2.4% higher than during the same period in 2022, according to the National Bureau of Statistics, up from 1.3% annually in December. Retail sales have led the rebound, with consumers able to spend freely for the first time in three years.

Guo Wengui, a billionaire wanted for corruption and bribery in China, was charged in New York with fraud and money laundering. Federal prosecutors said that Mr Guo and his at-large financial advisor, Kin Ming Je, defrauded victims of over $1bn, promising “outsized returns” if they invested in various companies. In 2020 Steve Bannon, a business associate, was arrested on Mr Guo’s yacht.

The president of Honduras, Xiomara Castro, said that her country would establish diplomatic ties with China and therefore sever them with Taiwan. China sees Taiwan as a breakaway province and does not allow official relations with both places. Honduras is the fourth Central American country to switch to China in the past six years, leaving Taiwan recognised by just 13 countries worldwide.

Fact of the day: 7m, the workers Germany’s labour market will lose by 2035 without reforms, according to the Institute for Employment Research. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
South Korea and Japan try to bury the hatchet
On Thursday Yoon Suk-yeol will become the first South Korean president in four years to visit a Japanese prime minister, currently Kishida Fumio. The pair hope to resolve a decades-old dispute.

During the second world war, when Japanese troops occupied the Korean peninsula, hundreds of thousands of Koreans were forced to toil in Japanese factories. In 2018 the South Korean supreme court ordered two Japanese companies to compensate 15 victims. But Japan insisted that the issue had been settled by a treaty in 1965. To resolve the stalemate, South Korea now says it will set up a fund to pay them, or their relatives, instead.

Mr Yoon hopes the proposal will allow the two countries to “move together toward the future”. They share concerns over growing economic and security threats from China. But nearly 60% of South Koreans oppose their government’s proposal. In 2015 outrage in Korea derailed another agreement between the countries, over Korean “comfort” women treated as sex slaves by the Japanese. This deal could share the same fate.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Baidu’s new chatbot enters the search wars
On Thursday Baidu, China’s search-engine giant, is set to release Ernie, an AI-powered chatbot. The launch follows a flurry of similar tools recently issued by American tech companies. The rush started in November with ChatGPT, a chatbot created by OpenAI, a Silicon Valley startup. Within two months ChatGPT had accrued over 100m monthly active users, making it the fastest-growing consumer application in history, according to UBS, a bank.

In February Microsoft, which owns 49% of OpenAI, added ChatGPT’s capabilities to Bing, its search engine. Alphabet, Google’s parent company, promptly launched Bard, its own bid for AI chatbot glory. A number of search startups, including Neeva and You.com, have introduced their own bots, too. All are betting that chatbots will upend the online search market, dominated by Google for decades. If so, the future of search might be AI-powered assistants that can summarise websites and respond thoughtfully to questions. Ernie will have plenty of friends.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Israel’s ever-growing civil unrest
Tens of thousands of pro-democracy demonstrators will take to the streets of Israel on Thursday for a so-called “Day of Disruption”. They have been protesting for more than two months against a judicial overhaul being pushed through by the hard-right government of Binyamin Netanyahu, the prime minister, which will weaken the powers of the Supreme Court. On Wednesday protestors tried to block an airport near Tel Aviv to disrupt Mr Netanyahu’s departure to Berlin.

The unrest is expected to reach breaking-point next week, when the first tranche of legislation is scheduled to be brought to the Knesset, Israel’s parliament, for its second and third readings. Protesters say that if the government does not back down, they will bring the economy to a standstill through transport blockades and strikes, as well as encourage massive disobedience in the army’s reserve units. Hoping to avert a crisis the president, Isaac Herzog, proposed his own, slimmed-down version of the government’s legislation. But neither side seems keen on compromise.


PHOTO: REUTERS
SVB complicates Europe’s fight against inflation
Policymakers at the European Central Bank could be forgiven for thinking they had weathered the storm. After all, headline inflation in the euro zone peaked at 10.6% in October; last month it stood at 8.5%. The ECB also quelled fears of another debt crisis in southern Europe with a bond-buying scheme that capped the borrowing costs of indebted states. A widely feared recession seems unlikely now.

But a meeting on Thursday of the ECB’s interest-rate setters will be tense. The collapse of Silicon Valley Bank last week, and a rout in Credit Suisse shares on Wednesday, have raised fears of a spillover from the banking sector into the wider economy. That has spurred doubt over whether the ECB will increase its deposit interest rate by the 0.5 percentage points markets had expected. Yet the urgency to fight rising prices in the euro zone is growing—underlying inflation, which excludes energy and food, is higher than in America, and rising. Policymakers face an especially difficult balancing act.



PHOTO: MARC BRENNER
An ecological whodunnit on stage
What if humans judged animal lives as valuable as their own? That is the premise of “Drive Your Plow Over the Bones of the Dead”, an eco-murder mystery published in 2009 by Olga Tokarczuk, a Polish Nobel-winning novelist. Janina, an eccentric retiree and devoted astrologer, turns sleuth when a series of mysterious deaths takes place in her isolated village in south-western Poland. One by one, men from the local hunting club become prey. Hoof tracks in the snow implicate the local wildlife.

In 2017 Ms Tokarczuk’s novel was dramatised in “Pokot” (“Spoor”, referring to the track or scent of an animal), a film directed by Agnieszka Holland. On Thursday a new stage version has its premiere at the Barbican in London. In a recent interview Ms Tokarczuk said theatre was a unique medium that captures “the most ancient ways of experiencing a story.” To her, the “energy of real live people” will amplify her meditation on nature and justice.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Thursday: What type of weather comes in three types: relief, convectional and fractal?

Wednesday: Which spice, often used to flavour ice cream, is derived from a species of orchid?

Hollywood is wonderful. Anyone who doesn't like it is either crazy or sober.

Raymond Chandler
