The world in brief
July 22, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Igor “Strelkov” Girkin, a former Russian intelligence officer and well-known war blogger, was reportedly arrested in Moscow and charged with “extremism”. Mr Girkin has criticised Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, and the country’s military leadership for not waging a sufficiently brutal or effective war in Ukraine. Authorities have arrested several prominent critics of Russia’s military strategy following Wagner’s aborted mutiny in June.

Seven American big-tech companies, including OpenAI, which created ChatGPT, agreed to voluntary safeguards for the development of “safe, secure and transparent” artificial intelligence, according to the White House. The firms committed to eight new rules, including the external testing of AI systems and the strengthening of privacy protections. Rapid progress has sparked anxiety about the dangers of the new technology.

A federal judge scheduled Donald Trump’s trial, over his mishandling of classified documents, for May 2024. Prosecutors wanted it held in December while defence attorneys had asked that it wait until after the 2024 election. Two months before the classified-documents trial, America’s former president will stand trial in New York for allegedly falsifying business records to conceal hush money paid to a porn star.

More than 1,000 air-force reservists in Israel threatened to stop reporting for duty next week if Binyamin Netanyahu charges ahead with his judicial reforms. Defence officials have said that so many no-shows could significantly impact the air force’s operational preparedness. The reservists argue that such significant reforms require “broad public consensus”.

The Federal Trade Commission dropped its in-house case against Microsoft’s $69bn acquisition of Activision Blizzard, a games developer. Microsoft and Activision had asked the FTC to withdraw its case against the mega-deal, arguing that it is in the public interest. On Wednesday they extended the deadline for the close of the merger to October 18th, giving them time to win the approval of Britain’s trustbuster, another holdout against the deal.

Police in Guatemala raided the headquarters of Semilla, the progressive party whose leader, Bernardo Arévalo, is running for president. He said it was “political persecution”. A judge suspended his party from standing in next month’s run-off election after he placed a surprise second in the first-round vote in June. The country’s top court then reversed the ban.

Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor, ordered state officials to probe whether AB InBev, Bud Light’s parent company, breached its responsibility to shareholders by hiring a transgender social-media influencer. The partnership with Dylan Mulvaney fuelled a boycott by conservatives; AB InBev has shed about a tenth of its stockmarket value since April. Mr DeSantis has also picked fights with Disney for its “wokery”.

Word of the week: Zeitenwende, or “historic turning point”. Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor, declared one after Russia invaded Ukraine. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Australians and Americans bond at sea
Talisman Sabre— a biennial military exercise between America, Australia and other countries—begins in earnest on Saturday as the USS Canberra is brought into active service. It will be the first time that an American warship is commissioned abroad. Named after an Australian heavy cruiser sunk in 1942 (pictured), the American littoral combat ship, an unusual trimaran designed to fight in coastal waters, entered Sydney harbour alongside its modern Australian namesake.

The festivities honour the tight bond between America and Australia, the strongest fibre in America’s growing lattice of alliances and partnerships in the Indo-Pacific to counterbalance China. With more than 30,000 troops from 16 countries, this year’s Talisman Sabre will be the largest yet. It will simulate amphibious landings, air assaults, air combat and more. Beyond showing that different military branches and countries can operate together, the exercise also signals that in any future war with China, say over Taiwan, America is unlikely to fight alone.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
What is the future of the Latino vote?
This weekend over 1,500 delegates from all over America are gathering at McCormick Place, Chicago’s biggest convention centre, for the annual conference of UnidosUS. The organisation advocates progressive policies intended to help people of Latin American origin in the United States—in particular around immigration rights. The keynote speaker this year is Kamala Harris, America’s vice-president, who will champion “the economic power of the Hispanic community”.

Among Democrats, worries about the Latino vote have grown. Though Latino voters largely remain more Democrat than Republican, a swing of some—particularly men—to the Republican party over the past decade has helped the Grand Old Party become dominant in Florida, and slow the drift of places like Texas towards the Democrats. In last year’s midterm elections, 60% of Hispanics voted Democratic, down from 72% in 2018. Who knows about 2024?


PHOTO: AIYUSH PACHNANDA/AMP AGENCY
A South Asian rave in London
The South-Asian Underground party scene has come a long way from its roots in the late 1980s. Young adults, keen to escape strict parents and a predominantly white club circuit, would once dance to bhangra (traditional Punjabi dance music) and British garage electronic mashups at sweaty daytime raves. Now a new generation of British South Asian artists want their music to go global.

This weekend the Dialled In festival returns to north-east London for a third year running. The line-up spans dhol drum classics to drill-music—a genre of rap. Organised in collaboration with Daytimers, No ID, and Chalo, all UK-based collectives, the festival aims to highlight hybrid identities on the dance-music scene. So far it has been a raving success. Dialled In’s trademark mix of sounds could be heard at Glastonbury this summer. It has travelled farther afield, including at the first event held by Boiler Room, a London-based online broadcaster, in Pakistan last year.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
How to become more creative
Artists, kindergarten teachers, CEOs and techy types agree that creativity is a good thing. The World Economic Forum called it “the one skill that will future-proof you for the jobs market”. But few are sure what it is—or where to find it. Luckily, The Economist has recommended the best books on the topic.

Interested in the creative mind? “Wired to Create”, by Scott Barry Kaufman and Carolyn Gregoire, charts recent developments in neuroscience and psychology, focusing on ten things creative people do differently. “The Artist’s Way”, by Julia Cameron, is a more practical manual. Creative types such as Alicia Keys and Patricia Cornwall credit it as the source of their success. “The Cult of Creativity”, by Samuel Franklin, asks where the concept originated. His conclusion? That its rise dovetailed with post-war capitalism, when a new service economy rewarded different skills than Fordian manufacturing—an antidote for anyone who has sat, pen in hand, struggling to locate their “divine muse”.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Qin Gang, China’s missing foreign minister
At some point the ill-explained, weeks-long disappearance of China’s foreign minister, Qin Gang, will come to an end. Quite possibly Mr Qin will quietly resume his duties, just as suddenly as he stopped work after a day of meetings on June 25th. Perhaps he will explain the undefined health issues that remain the only official reason for his absence. Still, Mr Qin’s career path might be about to take a grimmer turn: grandees sometimes vanish, before reappearing to face charges of corruption, immorality or dissent.

Mr Qin’s absence is a big deal because he is seen as Xi Jinping’s protégé. From 2014 to 2017 he served as head of diplomatic protocol, which involved lots of contact with Mr Xi. Provoking some envy as he rose, Mr Qin was fast-tracked to ministerial rank and into the party’s central committee in 2022, not long after being made a deputy foreign minister and ambassador to Washington.

Born in 1966 in Tianjin, a port city in the north-east, Mr Qin held a variety of roles in the foreign ministry, including two stints at the Chinese embassy in London. His familiarity with the West appears to co-exist with disdain. Indeed, some claim that Mr Qin reserves a special scorn for Western reporters, dating back to his first job after university, as a government-supplied researcher for an American news agency in Beijing.

The foreign minister is sometimes called a “wolf warrior”, but truly wolfish envoys are often crudely anti-Western. Mr Qin is more sophisticated, capable of charm and pragmatism. As the protocol chief charged with delivering a successful state visit by Donald Trump to Beijing in November 2017, Mr Qin cleared red tape and de-escalated crises, including, allegedly, a brief physical altercation between the White House’s then chief of staff, John Kelly, and a Chinese security official.

Yet Mr Qin has a talent for menace, too. He showed it in March 2021, when the European Union’s ambassador was summoned for a midnight dressing-down by Mr Qin, over EU sanctions relating to repression in Xinjiang. When the EU envoy resisted, he was warned to think of the consequences for his delegation, and by implication for the safety of his Chinese staff, diplomats relate.

Still, Mr Qin’s absence is a source of regret on the capital’s diplomatic circuit. In Mr Xi’s China, the black box of elite politics is only getting more opaque. China’s ruling classes continue to heed codes of silence reminiscent of 1950s Beijing. When clever, candid officials vanish, they are missed.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist.

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Oscar-dinner drama upset a politician (8,4)

1 across Seatless at Saint-Saens concert, left with car (6)

2 across Lloyd farmed sheep (5)

3 across King Lear’s insanity overshadows a backward country (6)

Factual clues

1 down He joined a love-fest in Washington in June (8,4)

1 across Its plant in Sunderland will open in 2025 (6)

2 across Ovine newsmaker in 1996 (5)

3 across Where “reasonableness” has revolutionised jurisprudence (6)



The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Michael Wyszkowski, Dripping Springs, Texas, America

Hoshedar Wadia, London, United Kingdom

Finnbogi Óskarsson, Reykjavík, Iceland

They all gave the correct answers of: Kidney, Black Panther, Pinto, Royal Navy and Lima. The theme is beans: kidney, black, pinto, navy and lima.

The questions were:

Monday: Nephritis is a disease associated with which organ?

Tuesday: Which is the most valuable ball in the game of snooker?

Wednesday: A horse with a coat consisting of patches of white and other colours is known in America by what name?

Thursday: Which branch of the armed services is often referred to in the UK as the “senior service”?

Friday: Which South American capital city was originally known as “Ciudad de Los Reyes”?

Honesty is as rare as a man without self-pity.

Stephen Vincent Benét
