The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (22:10 GMT+1 / 05:10 Hong Kong)

Jeremy Hunt, a former foreign minister, has been appointed Britain’s fourth chancellor of the exchequer this year. He replaces Kwasi Kwarteng, the second shortest-serving finance minister on record, who was sacked after his chaotic mini-budget unleashed financial and political turmoil in late September. Liz Truss, the prime minister, announced another humiliating U-turn, abandoning plans to scrap a proposed increase in corporation tax. It remains to be seen whether the latest measure will appease markets concerned about the rest of Ms Truss’s unfunded tax cuts.

Elon Musk, the world’s richest man, said his satellite-internet company, Starlink, could not “indefinitely” fund the service in Ukraine. Most of its 20,000 terminals in the country have been paid for by Western governments, but Mr Musk has contributed by waiving monthly fees. But the capricious billionaire’s relations with Ukraine have soured after his recent tweet appeared to mirror the Kremlin’s talking points.

A Maltese court sentenced two brothers to 40 years’ imprisonment each for the murder of Daphne Caruana Galizia, an investigative journalist killed by a car bomb in 2017. Alfred and George Degiorgio had pled not guilty, but later admitted involvement in exchange for a more lenient punishment. Four men have confessed to partaking in the murder. The alleged plotter is still awaiting trial.

Kroger, America’s largest grocery chain by market share, said it would buy Albertsons, the second-largest, for $24.6bn. Together the two would account for 13% of grocery sales; only Walmart commands a bigger market slice, at 22%. But that is assuming the deal goes through: trustbusters at the Federal Trade Commission may try to block the deal.

A jury in New York convicted the founder and former boss of Nikola, an American electric-vehicle startup, of defrauding investors. Prosecutors alleged that Trevor Milton made false statements about Nikola’s technology by claiming, for example, that an inoperable prototype was fully functional. Mr Milton, they said, took advantage of the fact that Nikola went public through a special-purpose acquisition company. Traditional IPOs have stricter disclosure rules.

Worries about the direction of Italy’s new hard-right coalition government deepened after Lorenzo Fontana was elected the new speaker of the lower house of Italy’s parliament. The MP from the Northern League is known for his eurosceptic views and admiration for Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. On Wednesday a politician who collects fasicst memorabilia was elected president of the senate.

Amid rising tensions on the Korean peninsula the north fired a short-range ballistic missile off its east coast, the latest in a series of such launches. The country also buzzed the heavily militarised border with the south with fighter jets and fired 170 artillery rounds into the “sea buffer” zones off the coast. South Korea’s president, Yoon Suk-yeol, denounced the “provocations”.

Word of the week: siloviki, Russia’s privileged securocrats. Read the full story.

Russia on the back foot in Ukraine

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ukrainian cities are still reeling from the barrage of Russian missiles that destroyed civilian infrastructure across the country at the start of the week. But for the soldiers on the ground, there is no rest. Russian mercenaries from the Wagner group have continued their slow, grinding advance on the city of Bakhmut in Donetsk province, in Ukraine’s east.

But Russia is on the back foot everywhere else. In Luhansk province, also in eastern Ukraine, Russian troops are digging in, anticipating a Ukrainian attack towards Svatove, part of Russia’s new defensive line. Russia’s position is even shakier in the south. Ukraine continues to advance towards a reported 20,000 Russian soldiers on the west bank of the Dnieper river near Kherson city. Their position looks extremely fragile. Vladimir Saldo, the head of Russia’s puppet regime in Kherson, has asked for Russia’s help in evacuating residents from the area. “We know that Russia doesn’t abandon its own,” he said earlier this week, plaintively.

China’s largest trade expo opens—online

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The twice-yearly Canton Fair, China’s largest trade show, began in the 1950s. It was held during China’s Great Famine and its Cultural Revolution. (Mao badges were then a hot commodity.) Even when the SARS epidemic struck in 2003, the show went on. But since the arrival of covid-19, the fair has moved online.

Over 34,000 Chinese firms are expected to show off their wares virtually in the 132nd edition, which begins on Saturday. Many suppliers will host live-stream video demonstrations of their products. Buyers may miss the “touch and feel” that were an important part of deal-making in the past.

As the world economy slows, China’s trade is also entering a difficult period. The growth of exports, which provided crucial support to China’s economy last year, has slowed sharply in recent months. Visitors to the Canton Fair will not be able to touch the products. But they will smell the apprehension.

Parisians rally against rising prices

PHOTO: PA
The French are on edge. Days of strikes at oil refineries, by workers demanding pay increases, have led to petrol shortages and long queues. Unions have called a general strike for October 18th. On Sunday demonstrators will take to the streets of Paris to protest against the rising cost of living. The march is organised by Jean-Luc Mélenchon’s left-wing alliance, NUPES. Some unionists have promised to join in. Annie Ernaux, a French novelist and winner of this year’s Nobel prize for literature, is also backing the demonstrators. Never shy of a provocative allusion, Mr Mélenchon has called on participants to “do better” than the women’s march in 1789, an early event in the French Revolution.

The planned show of force comes at an awkward time for President Emmanuel Macron. He is spending heavily to tamp down energy bills. But he is also planning to raise the retirement age, an unpopular measure, after having lost his parliamentary majority. France looks set for a difficult autumn, on and off the streets.

The T20 World Cup

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The West Indies are the only team to win cricket’s Twenty20 World Cup twice, triumphing in 2012 in Sri Lanka and again four years later in India. That second win was particularly memorable. Needing a daunting 19 runs from their final six balls, Carlos Brathwaite hit England’s Ben Stokes into the stands for four consecutive sixes. But if the Windies are to prevail in this year’s tournament, which begins in Australia on Sunday, they will have to do it the hard way.

Their dismal showing in the previous World Cup in 2021, where they lost four of their five matches, consigned them to qualifying for this edition. To reach the main stage, they will have to finish in the top two of a group also containing Ireland, Scotland and Zimbabwe. They will be favourites, but their task has been made more difficult by the absence of star batsman Shimron Hetmyer, who was dropped from the squad after missing his flight to Australia.

Weekend Profile: Mohammed Rostami Gachi, Iran’s brutal enforcer

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
It was his rapid promotion that surprised many. Just a few months into his post as the police chief of Talesh, an Iranian provincial backwater, Mohammed Rostami Gachi was promoted to head the Islamic Republic’s morality police 400km away in the capital, Tehran. Previous Iranian governments had never thought much of him. But the incoming administration of Ibraham Raisi in 2021 admired Mr Gachi’s hardline beliefs. Shortly after taking the job he declared his intention to enforce the mandatory veil for women, which had fallen loose under the pragmatist presidency of Hassan Rouhani. “Those who stubbornly remove the hijab are criminals,” Mr Gachi told Iran’s press.

Over the following months, he reactivated the morality police. Their men in dark green uniforms and women in black chadors scoured the streets hunting for infringements of sharia. They broke up bands jamming in cafes. They hauled girls caught for “bad” hijabs away in their windowless vans and took them to facilities for “re-education”. Sometimes they gave them a beating. And then, on September 13th, Mr Gachi’s men carted away 22-year-old Mahsa Amini to her death three days later for improperly wearing the veil.

The popular protests that this sparked had, in truth, been some time in the making. Under Mr Rouhani, Iran breathed more easily with an unwritten contract: leave the clerics to wield power and let society live as it wants. The Islamic republic shrank into an Islamic government. Mr Raisi’s determination to turn the clock back and apply sharia to an ever-more secular population tipped resentment into civil disobedience. Even before Ms Amini was killed, female students were spilling out of their segregated campus canteens into male ones. Women on buses and the metro disregarded even their token nod to a head covering.

The mullahs’ crackdown might have been easier to digest had they practised the moral strictures they preached. But while people’s incomes declined, mullahs’ sons ostentatiously combed Tehran’s highways in their Ferraris. And some questioned Mr Gachi’s standards of enforcement when it came to his own. His brother accumulated businesses in their hometown of Kermanshah.

As protests against Ms Amini’s death spread—costing, so far, more than 200 lives—Mr Gachi’s patrols disappeared from the streets. Western governments have imposed sanctions against him and his morality police for “spreading a culture of violence and excessive force”. For Mr Gachi, they were just spreading Islam.

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown the winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Unpopular leader ruins a menial hike (3,8)

1 across In every other saloon unfinished puzzle is big business (6)

2 across Mountains finally crumble into sand, top-to-bottom (5)

3 across Without workers, we’re told, value must come from elsewhere (6)

Factual clues

1 down Someone being urged to heed the voices of the people (3,8)

1 across An American giant (6)

2 across One place where coca leaves grow (5)

3 across Its illegal to do this with some firewood in New York State (6)


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Masnoon Bujang, Kuching, Malaysia

North America: Wendy King, Sherbrooke, Canada

Central and South America: Caio Priszculnik, São Paulo, Brazil

Europe: Sven Nilsson, Copenhagen, Denmark

Africa: Ailsa Green, Choma, Zambia

Oceania: Andrew McMenamin, Lincoln, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of Joshua, Rocky Balboa, Smokey Robinson, Zion and Bryce Dallas Howard. The theme is US national parks: Joshua Tree, Rocky Mountain, Great Smokey Mountains, Zion and Bryce Canyon.

They can because they think they can.

Virgil
