The world in brief
May 10, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A jury found Donald Trump liable for sexually abusing and defaming the writer E. Jean Carroll. Ms Carroll, who brought a civil lawsuit against the former president, was awarded $5m in damages. The Manhattan jury rejected the accusation of rape. Mr Trump, who is running for president again in 2024, has faced more than a dozen credible allegations of sexual misconduct over the years (he denies all charges). This was the first to succeed before a jury.

Protests erupted in several cities in Pakistan after Imran Khan, a former prime minister, was detained outside a court in Islamabad, the capital, by the country’s anti-corruption force. Footage released by Mr Khan’s political party, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, shows paramilitary troops leading him into an armoured vehicle. Since being ousted from office last year Mr Khan has vociferously campaigned against his successor, Shehbaz Sharif, and called for early elections.

America’s House speaker, Kevin McCarthy, said he saw no “new movement” after concluding the first round of negotiations with President Joe Biden and party leaders in the House and Senate on raising the federal debt ceiling. Mr McCarthy and other Republicans insist on spending cuts in exchange for lifting the government’s borrowing limit, which Mr Biden wants raised without conditions. The same group will meet again on Friday.

In Gaza funerals began for 15 people killed by an air raid which Israel’s military said targeted three commanders of Islamic Jihad, a militant group. Eight women and children were among the dead, according to Palestinian health officials. Last week Egypt, Qatar and the UN brokered a ceasefire between Israel and Palestinian groups after a surge in violence in the region.

Saudi Aramco, Saudi Arabia’s oil giant, reported first-quarter profits of $31.9bn, down 19% from the same period a year earlier. The company blamed the drop on the price of crude oil, which is falling amid fears of a recession. In 2022 Aramco reported a net income of $161bn, the most by any company in history, as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine caused the oil price to soar.

Canada expelled a Chinese diplomat for intimidating a lawmaker. Zhao Wei, an official working in the Chinese consulate in Toronto, reportedly tried to obtain personal information about Michael Chong and his family. The MP has been a vocal critic of China’s treatment of its Uyghur Muslim population. Mélanie Joly, Canada’s foreign minister, declared Mr Zhao “persona non grata”. China retaliated by expelling a Canadian diplomat from Shanghai.

LinkedIn, a social-media platform for professionals, said it would lay off 716 workers and shut down its jobs app in China. In a letter to employees, Ryan Roslansky, the company’s boss, blamed waning demand. He also said InCareer, the China-focused app, faced fierce competition and would be phased out by August. LinkedIn is the only big Western social-media platform operating in China.

Fact of the day: $279m, the amount America’s financial regulator paid to a whistleblower on May 5th. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Imran Khan’s arrest escalates a political crisis
If Imran Khan was expecting an uneventful day in court on Tuesday, he was mistaken. Paramilitary personnel bundled Pakistan’s former prime minister off the premises of the Islamabad High Court, where he was due for a separate case, and deposited him in the custody of the country’s anti-corruption authorities. (Mr Khan denies any wrongdoing.) The arrest sparked violent protests.

Mr Khan, who was ousted from office thirteen months ago, is seeking a way back to power. In a bid to force the government to hold early elections, his party brought about the dissolution of two provincial assemblies in January. But the prime minister Shehbaz Sharif—keen to buy time to improve the economy—wants unified polls to be held in October. The political crisis turned constitutional when the Supreme Court ordered elections in one crucial province, Punjab, on May 14th—an order the central government and parliament have rejected. Whenever elections are held, Mr Khan may now have to watch them unfold from a jail cell.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America’s stubbornly high inflation
Central bankers, investors and consumers would like to be done with inflation. The problem is that inflation is not yet done with them. Figures released on Wednesday are expected to show that consumer prices in America rose by 0.4% in April from a month earlier—an annualised pace of 5%, more than double the Federal Reserve’s target of 2%.

Worryingly, underlying measures of core inflation, which strip out volatile food and energy costs, will probably have increased at roughly the same rate as headline inflation. Services such as transport and medical care are growing more expensive, fuelled by a tight labour market. A brief period of declining goods prices earlier this year may have ended.

The firmness of inflation complicates the Fed’s next step. Many investors think it will stop raising interest rates, due to concerns about the fallout from banking turmoil. But with inflation staying high, it may feel compelled to press on and up.


PHOTO: AP
Biden’s first fundraiser for 2024
Running for president is expensive. Joe Biden’s campaign raised more than $1bn in 2020, and will be hoping for even more this time. Though the election is 18 months away, declared candidates are already raising funds and must publish the totals every three months. Their numbers are a measure of support; besides paying for advertising and other expenses, good figures can help build momentum in a campaign. Mr Biden, who launched his in April, has until July 15th to reveal his first haul.

The president’s first major re-election fundraiser is being held on Wednesday in New York. Hosted by Tony James, a former private-equity executive, the do costs $25,000 to attend. But Mr Biden’s financier friends may be worrying about the return on their investment: a poll released at the weekend by the Washington Post showed Mr Biden’s approval rating down by six points from February, to just 36%. And, given the choice of Mr Biden or Donald Trump as their next president, voters preferred the latter.



PHOTO: REUTERS
Turkey and Syria resume diplomacy
On Wednesday the foreign ministers of Turkey and Syria will hold their first official meeting since the start of the Syrian civil war in 2011. Hosted by Russia, and including Iran, the meeting will be a diplomatic victory for the Syrian regime, which was, until recently, a pariah.

Both Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, and Kemal Kilicdaroglu, his rival in an election on May 14th, want better ties with Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad. Many Arab leaders have also re-established ties. On May 7th the Arab League re-admitted the country after nearly 12 years of suspension.

The end of Mr Assad’s diplomatic isolation has not, so far, brought him much of the aid and investment needed for the reconstruction of his war- and earthquake-ravaged country. He no doubt hopes that better relations with his neighbours will change that. They, meanwhile, want to send home some of the 5m Syrian refugees they host. But few Syrians wish to return to their shattered country.


PHOTO: NETFLIX
Netflix’s controversial Cleopatra
Very few reliable facts are known about Cleopatra, who ruled Egypt from 51 to 30 BC. Given scant primary sources, academics and artists have long made deductions about her appearance. On Wednesday “Queen Cleopatra”, a Netflix documentary, will present a new version. Controversially for some, this Cleopatra is black.

Early sources do not mention Cleopatra’s race. She was descended from a Greek-Macedonian dynasty who are thought to have had fair skin. But there are gaps in her genealogy, which some historians think may have included Egyptian ancestors with darker skin.

Historians on the show acknowledge this uncertainty. Nevertheless, casting Adele James, a British actress, as the queen caused outrage in Egypt. In April Egypt’s government insisted that Cleopatra was “light-skinned”. Shortly after, an Egyptian film company announced it would make its own, more “accurate”, documentary. But without firmer evidence they too will be forced to fill in gaps. Egypt’s last Pharaoh will be re-imagined, yet again.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: What pejorative term was given to the German politicians who signed the armistice at the end of the first world war?

Tuesday: Which is Canada’s largest province by area?

The secret of getting things done is to act.

Dante Aligheri
