The world in brief
August 4, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Donald Trump pleaded not guilty to four charges related to his efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election, including conspiracy to defraud America. The former president and 2024 Republican primary challenger was arraigned in a federal courtroom in Washington, DC. It was his third arraignment in four months; in the two others Mr Trump also delivered not-guilty pleas, at courthouses in Miami and New York.

Russia said it had shot down seven Ukrainian drones near Moscow, in the latest of a series of strikes on its capital. In return the Ukrainian air force said it had downed 20 drones near its capital Kyiv. Meanwhile, the leaders of Poland and Lithuania said that Wagner mercenaries—which in June relocated from Russia to Belarus—may try to destabilise NATO’s eastern flank.

Thousands of people took to the street in Niamey, Niger’s capital, in support of a military coup last week. Some carried Russian flags and chanted anti-French slogans (Thursday is Niger’s independence day from France, its former colonial power). Earlier, Joe Biden, America’s president, called for the release of Mohamed Bazoum, Niger’s ousted leader who is being held by the army.

The Bank of England raised interest rates by 0.25 percentage points, to 5.25%, its highest level in 15 years. After nearly two years of tightening annual inflation fell from 10.1% at the start of 2023 to 7.9% in June. But markets expect the bank to raise rates by a further half a percentage point before the end of the year.

Islamic State announced its new leader, Abu Hafs al-Hashimi al-Qurayshi, and acknowledged the death of its former leader, Abu Hussein al-Husseini al-Qurayshi, whom Turkish intelligence forces reportedly killed in Syria in April. (IS blames an al-Qaeda-linked militant group.) Like his successor, the late leader used the al-Qurayshi nom de guerre to imply a link to the Quraysh tribe of the Prophet Muhammad.

A South Korean man injured at least 14 people in Seongnam, a town near Seoul, the capital. The assailant drove his car onto the pavement, before getting out and stabbing people in a shopping centre. Police arrested him at the scene. No motive is known for the attack—violent crimes are rare in South Korea—which the country’s police chief described it as “indiscriminate”.

A six-month ceasefire began between Colombia’s government and the National Liberation Army, a leftist guerrilla group that has been active since the 1960s. Since becoming president in 2022, Gustavo Petro has made achieving “total peace” in the country his main priority—without much success. An attempted truce in December ended in acrimony, with the guerrillas claiming they never actually signed up.

Figure of the day: $91bn, the foreign direct investment Brazil received last year, making it the fifth-largest largest investment destination in the world. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Gandhi appeals to India’s Supreme Court
India’s Supreme Court will on Friday hear an appeal by Rahul Gandhi, the leader of Congress, the biggest opposition party. Mr Gandhi is hoping that the court will reverse his conviction in March for defamation. He was sentenced to two years in prison and disqualified from parliament; he is now out of prison on bail. Mr Gandhi says the case is politically motivated.

During a campaign speech in 2019 Mr Gandhi made a remark about people named Modi, the surname of India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi. Purnesh Modi, a lawmaker in Gujarat, the prime minister’s home state, who is a member of India’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, claimed that Mr Gandhi’s remark defamed him and his community. A state court agreed.

Two courts have already rejected Mr Gandhi’s appeals. He has been unable to participate in the monsoon session of parliament, which began in July. A by-election for his seat is likely to be held soon. India’s constitution says that no seat may be left vacant for longer than six months. If the Supreme Court rules against Mr Gandhi his prison sentence may take effect. His chances of returning to electoral politics look slim.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America’s loosening labour market
Perhaps the biggest economic story of the year has been America’s immaculate disinflation: prices pressures have diminished even as the economy has remained robust. A crucial reason has been the gradual softening of the labour market. Job growth has slowed a bit and wage increases have been smaller. Data released on Friday will show whether these trends continued in July.

Economists think that America added about 180,000 jobs last month. That would be the smallest monthly number since 2020, although it is close to pre-pandemic averages. Meanwhile, wages are thought to have risen by 4.2% year on year, the slowest growth in two years. A smaller increase would unsettle investors and sow doubts about whether disinflation can be painless after all. The Federal Reserve, though, may have the opposite worry. A sharper-than-expected wage rise would suggest that it must raise interest rates higher still to rein in inflation.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Green shipping’s buoyant future
On Friday Maersk, the world’s second-largest container-shipping group, reports its second-quarter earnings. The group will probably report tanking profits: as the global economy slows, a pandemic-driven boom in freight is ending.

The short-term slump hides a promising trend. In June Maersk ordered six vessels with engines able to run on “green” methanol, a chemical that could help cut shipping’s carbon emissions—worth 3% of the global total. In 2021 the firm placed the world’s first order for such ships. In total it has now ordered 25 and the global order book now stands at more than 100.

Unlike other green fuels such as ammonia or hydrogen, methanol can be stored at room temperature, and engines running on it already exist. It will not replace bunker oil, guzzled by ships for the last century, until lots more refuelling terminals and fuel-production capacity are built. But at least the green shipping business has been launched.



PHOTO: AP
Alexei Navalny is sentenced, again
On Friday the latest trial of Alexei Navalny, Russia’s most prominent dissident, is expected to reach a verdict. Mr Navalny faces spurious charges of extremism, including the “rehabilitation of Nazism”. Prosecutors also allege that the Anti-Corruption Foundation, his NGO, incites criminal activities.

The case has been heard at a penal colony some 250km (150 miles) east of Moscow, where the dissident is imprisoned. He has already been convicted of a parole violation, fraud and contempt of court and is serving a sentence of 11 and a half years.

He will almost certainly be found guilty of the latest charges, and receive a long extension of his sentence. According to Mr Navalny’s supporters, prosecutors want to add 20 years. In truth, the number is academic: allies understand that Mr Navalny will be in prison for as long as Vladimir Putin remains Russia’s president.


PHOTO: DENIS O’REGAN / SOTHEBY'S
Freddie Mercury’s belongings at auction
“I like to be surrounded by splendid things,” Freddie Mercury once said, “by exquisite clutter”. He filled Garden Lodge—his home in Kensington, London—with a panoply of items: bespoke furniture; delicate glass vases; kimonos and decorative objects from Japan; artworks by Chagall, Matisse and Picasso; and, of course, colourful costumes he performed in with Queen.

After Mercury’s death in 1991, Garden Lodge went to Mary Austin, his friend and former lover. In April she announced that, bar some “personal gifts”, she would be selling the lot—more than 1,400 items in total. From Friday, they are available to view at Sotheby’s in London ahead of a spate of auctions in August and September. Mercury’s collection includes several mementoes from rock history. A working draft of the lyrics to “Bohemian Rhapsody” could fetch up to £1.2m ($1.5m.) The baby grand piano on which he wrote many of Queen’s most famous songs is valued at £2m-3m.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: What was the nickname of the 19th century businessman, Cornelius Vanderbilt?

Thursday: What was the name of the “paranoid android” in “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy” series?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

William Meldrum, Melbourne, Australia
Sunil Chhabra, Mississauga, Canada
Nirmalendu Jajodia, Mumbai, India

They all gave the correct answers of Nigel Farage, Nvidia, flour and empire. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

I can’t die. It would ruin my image.

Jack LaLanne
