The world in brief
April 14, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The FBI arrested Jack Teixeira, the alleged leader of a gun-loving online group that hosted leaked American intelligence files. America’s top prosecutor, Merrick Garland, said that Mr Teixeira, a 21-year-old man working for the intelligence wing of the Massachusetts Air National Guard, was accused of illegally sharing “classified national defence information” and that he will be arraigned later today. The classified materials include military assessments on the war in Ukraine and CIA reports on a range of global issues.

America’s Department of Justice is seeking emergency relief from the Supreme Court in a case over access to mifepristone, a pill used for abortions, after a judge in Texas suspended federal approval of the drug. A late-night ruling from the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals will keep it on the shelves—at least temporarily—but imposed older, more restrictive rules about its use. The Supreme Court has not said whether it will take up the case.

China’s exports rose 14.8% in March, bucking five consecutive months of decline, and defying economists’ expectations of a 7% drop. Shipments to Russia and South-East Asian countries grew in volume, but to America and Europe they continued to fall. The strong figures, which analysts attribute to an increased demand for electric vehicles, bolstered hopes that China could hit its annual GDP growth target of 5%.

Germany’s foreign minister began a visit to China. EU countries hope that Annalena Baerbock will reassert a common European policy after a widely criticised press interview by Emmanuel Macron. Referring to Taiwan, the French president argued that Europe should not get “caught up in crises that are not ours”; the remark was seen as a victory for China’s policy of driving a wedge between America and Europe.

Ghana became the first country to approve a new malaria vaccine, permitting jabs for children aged between five months and three years, the group most at risk of dying from the disease. Malaria kills about 600,000 people annually, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa. In a clinical trial the vaccine, developed by Oxford University, showed an efficacy rate of between 70 and 80%.

Alibaba’s share price plunged after it emerged that SoftBank will sell nearly all of its stake in the Chinese tech giant. According to the Financial Times, the Japanese investment group will flog about $7.2bn-worth of Alibaba shares through forward contracts. That would bring down its stake to 3.8%, from nearly 24% in June 2022.

Britain’s Premier League banned its football clubs from displaying gambling sponsorship on the front of their shirts. Currently eight clubs, including Fulham and Newcastle, play with such betting adverts; the total estimated value of these sponsorships is £60m ($75m). However, gambling adverts can still be shown on players’ sleeves and on pitch-side hoardings.

Fact of the day: $104bn, the total reconstruction cost from Turkey’s earthquake according to a report by the country’s strategy-and-budget office. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Macron’s next headache
After stirring controversy abroad with his remarks about Taiwan, on Friday Emmanuel Macron faces a crucial decision at home. The French Constitutional Council will rule on whether the president’s pension reform passes muster. His legislation raises the country’s minimum retirement age from 62 to 64 years, and has provoked ongoing protests and strikes. Mr Macron pushed the measure through parliament in March without a direct vote, narrowly winning a subsequent vote of no-confidence in his government.

It is rare, but not unprecedented, for the council to overturn legislation that has passed through parliament. An outright rejection of the reform would provoke a political crisis. But if the council validates it, this too will be met with an outcry. The council will also rule on an opposition initiative to launch a petition for a referendum on limiting the pension age to 62. Mr Macron’s political troubles are not over yet.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A reckoning for America’s banking system
America’s big banks, including JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup and Wells Fargo, report first-quarter earnings on Friday. After the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank and subsequent shocks, these results should reveal something of the lay of the land. There was widespread deposit flight from smaller banks to larger ones—just how much will now become apparent. Lower deposits should lead to rising funding costs for some smaller banks, which will squeeze their net interest margins (the difference between what they pay for funding and what they receive on loans). Whether that has imperilled any other banks will soon be clearer. And the extent to which certain banks have drawn on emergency lending facilities created by the Fed could also show up.

Some of those details, however, might only be revealed by the regional banks, which report next week. The smaller ones that have struggled, like First Republic, don’t report until the week after that. The worst of the storm appears to have passed. Now it is time for the fog to clear.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Two ill-timed Republican get-togethers
Republican presidential hopefuls are fine-tuning their Second Amendment talking points. Confirmed candidates such as Donald Trump and Nikki Haley—and unconfirmed ones, like Ron DeSantis and Mike Pence—are speaking on Friday at the National Rifle Association’s 152nd annual convention. As was the case in 2022, the meeting comes on the heels of two mass shootings; the cities in mourning this year are Louisville, Kentucky, and Nashville, Tennessee.

Nashville will also host a Republican meeting on Friday, as donors gather there for a long-planned retreat. They are sure to face uncomfortable questions about both the recent school shooting, in which a former student killed three children, as well as the subsequent vote by the state’s Republican-controlled legislature to expel two black Democratic lawmakers who agitated for gun control.

Some conservatives have expressed concern about the party’s image. Even before the latest tragedies, a majority of Americans said they favoured stricter gun laws. In the wake of these events Nancy Mace, a Republican congresswoman from South Carolina, said that members of her party “aren’t showing compassion”.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
British doctors on strike
On Friday nearly 50,000 junior doctors in England and Wales conclude a 96-hour strike for better pay. As many as 300,000 operations and procedures will have been cancelled as a result of the walk-out; disastrous given that hospital waiting lists already top 7m. Despite this, polling suggests that over half of Britons still support the strikers.

Doctors, many of whom are not actually so junior, are tired of working on understaffed wards. Adding insult to injury are the years of real-terms pay cuts: a union talking point is that one in ten of their number are paid little more than baristas at a popular chain of coffee shops. But the government will never agree to their demands for a 35% pay rise—which would make salaries equivalent to their level 15 years ago—and thus genuine negotiations have never begun. Meanwhile, a third of junior doctors, according to the British Medical Association, plan to leave to work abroad in the next 12 months.


PHOTO: UNIVERSAL PICTURES
The vampire strikes back
“Dracula” films are rising from the grave. Since “Dracula Untold” came out in 2014, the archetypal vampire from Bram Stoker’s 1897 novel has been seen only in the “Hotel Transylvania” cartoons. But now he is back in the flesh in “Renfield”, a gory action comedy. Nicolas Cage plays the Transylvanian blood-sucker; Nicholas Hoult plays the minion who realises that he has the boss from hell (in more ways than one).

In August a more serious chiller, “The Last Voyage of the Demeter”, will depict Dracula’s sea voyage from Carpathia to England. And Mr Hoult will appear again in Robert Eggers’ forthcoming remake of “Nosferatu”, the classic German adaptation of Stoker’s book.

Hollywood is counting on the Count because monster movies and slasher movies are currently making a killing, as this year’s “M3gan” and “Scream VI” demonstrated. Besides, now that studios are running out of comic-book superheroes to put in their blockbusters, they need new blood.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Friday: Who assassinated Abraham Lincoln?

Thursday: Who composed the opera “Porgy and Bess”?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Michael Angelo Sorice, Champaign, Illinois, America
Corien Kershey, Ottawa, Canada
Arne Tobias Ødegaard, Bergen, Norway

They all gave the correct answers of Good Friday, Grand, Flux and Young. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

The optimist proclaims that we live in the best of all possible worlds; and the pessimist fears this is true.

James Branch Cabell
