The world in brief
March 31, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A grand jury in New York voted to indict Donald Trump for his alleged role in covering up hush-money payments to an adult-film actress, several news outlets reported. The Manhattan district attorney has yet to announce the felony indictment, which would be the first criminal charge ever brought against a former American president. Mr Trump has denied wrongdoing in the case; it is one of several legal challenges that he faces.

Finland will become part of NATO, ending a longstanding policy of military neutrality, after Turkey’s parliament ratified its bid to join the alliance. It won approval from Hungary earlier this week. Hungary and Turkey continue to oppose Sweden’s accession. The Nordic countries had sought to join NATO together after Russia invaded Ukraine; Finland shares a 1,300km-long border with Russia.

The Biden administration condemned “in the strongest possible terms” Russia’s arrest of a reporter for the Wall Street Journal on charges of spying. Russia’s domestic security service claims Evan Gershkovich was gathering confidential information about Russia’s military factories. He is the first journalist working for an American paper to be detained by Russia for alleged espionage since the cold war.

German inflation fell from 8.7% to 7.4% year-on-year in March as the spike in energy costs caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine subsided. The figure was higher than many analysts predicted and small compared to the drop in Spain, which saw inflation rise by just 3.3% year-on-year. An estimate of euro zone inflation will be released on Friday. Weaker rates of inflation will bolster calls for the European Central Bank to pause raising interest rates. It next meets in May.

Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, said the EU must have a “bolder” approach to a “more assertive” China, in a speech ahead of a visit to the country next week. Mrs von der Leyen called for stricter controls over trade in sectors with military importance, such as AI. She also implied that an EU-China commercial pact, agreed in 2020 but never implemented, might be shelved.

Ukrainian officials admitted that Russian forces have had some success in their assault on Bakhmut, a contested town in the country’s east. Ukrainian troops, however, are “holding” on, according to the army. Meanwhile, Rafael Grossi, the head of the UN’s nuclear watchdog, visited the Zaporizhia nuclear power station—which is occupied by Russia—and called for “every possible measure” to protect the plant.

Disney, an American entertainment company, fired Isaac Perlmutter, the chairman of Marvel Entertainment, a small division responsible for comic books and some consumer products. The division, which Disney acquired in 2009, will now be merged into larger business units. Mr Perlmutter had reportedly clashed with Bob Iger, Disney’s chairman, on several issues. His sacking is part of a larger purge to cut $5.5bn in costs.

Fact of the day: 71%, the expansion of India’s GDP over the past decade. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Inflation and banks test the ECB’s resolve
Europe’s inflation figures for March were always going to provide some relief. Price increases caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which started in late February 2022, are starting to drop out of the annual index. Numbers released in Spain and Germany this week indeed suggest a steep fall in the inflation rate: Spanish figures came down to just 3.3%, compared with 6% a month earlier; in Germany the rate dropped from 8.7% to 7.4%.

The latest estimate for the EU as a whole is published on Friday. Sliding inflation figures could prompt the decision-making body of the European Central Bank to reduce the pace of rate increases—as could the banking woes that have shaken European markets. The next meeting of the monetary policy committee is at the start of May. But it should not get distracted. Core inflation, which excludes volatile energy and food prices, still stands at 7.5% in Spain and remains high in the rest of the euro zone. And Europe’s banking sector seems safe.



PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
The Biden administration’s antitrust agenda
The leadership of the Federal Trade Commission, one of America’s main antitrust watchdogs, is supposed to be bipartisan. But on Friday the sole remaining Republican commissioner will step down over differences with the FTC’s chair, Lina Khan.

As a law student Ms Khan made her name advocating that Amazon be broken up or regulated as a public utility. She and fellow trustbusters at the Department of Justice argue that massive companies like it pose inherent risks to consumers, no matter how competitive their prices. Yet the Biden administration’s approach of suing to block mergers has fared poorly: attempts to stop acquisitions by Meta, Facebook’s parent; Illumina, a biotech firm; and UnitedHealth Group, a health insurer, all failed.

Still, that aggressive strategy has had a less quantifiable impact by dissuading businesses from even attempting tie-ups. Aon, Lockheed Martin and Nvidia—an insurer, defence manufacturer and chipmaker, respectively—all chose to abandon deals rather than litigate. That is not to mention the many others who will have shied away from mergers in the first place.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
“Tetris” returns in film form
Nearly 40 years after its monochrome debut, “Tetris” is back. A film of the same name as the puzzle video game launches on Apple TV+ on Friday. It tells the true (but heavily embellished) story of an American game publisher’s battle to win the rights to the game, which was developed in the Soviet Union. Critics say the film is fun, if not quite as addictive as the original.

“Tetris” is the latest in a rush of game dramatisations. Two things explain the trend. First, modern games like “Uncharted” and “The Last of Us” are narratively rich enough to merit the Hollywood treatment. Second, film studios are now run by a generation who grew up with games and are gripped by titles like “Tetris” and “Gran Turismo”, even if they make unlikely subjects for scripts. As audiences tire of superheroes (“Shazam!” recently bombed), some think games might be the next big source of intellectual property in Hollywood.


PHOTO: ALAMY
SM Entertainment and the K-pop wars
SM Entertainment and the K-pop wars

SM Entertainment, one of South Korea’s biggest production companies churning out K-pop stars, will hold its annual shareholders’ meeting on Friday. It comes after a month of K-pop corporate drama. HYBE, the label behind global superstars BTS, aggressively pursued, but then called off, a takeover bid for SM. The acquisition would have made HYBE the biggest and most influential K-pop agency in history, with a market capitalisation of nearly $9bn. Instead Kakao, a giant South Korean tech group, swooped in to secure a controlling stake in SM on Tuesday.

Shareholders will expect to hear how Kakao can help revive the fortunes of SM, an industry powerhouse which started up the K-pop wave in the early 2000s. SM’s revamp includes plans to conquer America and South-East Asia by acquiring local labels. Fans need not fear it’ll be all business though; plans for SM’s new virtual popstar, Naevis, will be unveiled. She was supposed to debut in March at a film festival in Texas, but never showed up.


PHOTO: THE TRUSTEES OF THE NATURAL HIST
Long neck at the Natural History Museum
First there was Dippy the Diplodocus, then Archie the giant squid and later Hope the blue-whale skeleton with the sharp nose—all star attractions at London’s Natural History Museum. Now, outweighing them all, comes Titanosaur. One hundred million years old, Patagotitan mayorum is one of the largest land animals to have ever existed.

Patagotitan was discovered in 2010 by a farmer in central Patagonia, Argentina, who spied the tip of its massive fossilised femur bone sticking out of the ground. It is in fact a composite; palaeontologists went on to excavate 130 other bones from six different dinosaurs with it, which, together with some plaster casts, allowed them to fill in any gaps and reconstruct the biggest dinosaur skeleton ever found. Its neck is 14-metres long (45.9 feet) and it would have had to chomp its way through 120 kilos of food every day. Grass had not yet evolved so it lived off ferns and tree tops. The original Big Foot.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Thursday: Which tough-guy actor won an Oscar for his performance in “The African Queen”?

Friday: Which food conglomerate started as the Hawaiian Pineapple Company and owned the island of Lanai?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Leonid Chindelevitch, Bristol, Britain

Amelia Cheng, Coquitlam, Canada

Teodoro Padilla, Manila, Philippines

They all gave the correct answers of Credit Suisse, Canada, Tesla and Exotic. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Doubt is the origin of wisdom.

René Descartes
