The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (01:13 GMT+1 / 08:13 Hong Kong)

Russia claimed full control of Luhansk, an area in the Donbas region of Ukraine, though Ukrainian officials are yet to admit defeat. Russia said it had captured the city of Lysychansk, the last Ukrainian holdout in the region. Russia has been trying to drive all Ukrainian troops out of the Donbas, where Russian-backed separatists have been fighting for control since 2014.

A gunman shot and killed three people in a shopping centre in Copenhagen. A further three were wounded and in a critical condition on Sunday night, police said. They arrested a 22-year-old Danish man in connection with the attack. Authorities have not ruled out terrorism.

Germany’s economic minister warned that the country faces further gas shortages because of Vladimir Putin’s strategy of “economic warfare”. Robert Habeck said that the Russian president is deliberately driving up gas prices to weaken European countries. Germany relies on Russia for much of its energy. Mr Habeck added that the government might have to allow more price increases to be passed onto consumers.

Aleksandr Lukashenko, the president of Belarus, said he has ordered the country’s armed forces to attack Western countries if they attack Belarus. A state news agency reported him as saying “do not touch us, and we will not touch you”. Mr Lukashenko also claimed, without evidence, that Belarus had intercepted Ukrainian missile strikes on the country. The claims came amid fears that Belarus may increase its involvement in Russia’s war.

North Korea claimed that an agreement between America, South Korea and Japan to strengthen their military co-operation was part of an American plan to create a defensive alliance similar to NATO in Asia. The leaders of the three countries met during a NATO summit last week and agreed that North Korea’s weapons program and missile tests justified “extended deterrence”.

Floods in Sydney forced thousands to evacuate the Australian city. Authorities said emergency services had carried out 83 flood rescues so far and that one man had died. Similar floods killed 20 people in March; freakish weather has become more common in recent years.

Civilians and police officers died at protests in Uzbekistan; thousands of people were reportedly hospitalised. The protests, held on Friday, were in response to planned constitutional changes stripping Karakalpakstan, an autonomous region, of its status. The changes were abruptly dropped on Saturday.

Fact of the day: $750, the signing bonus offered to new lifeguards in Austin amid a nationwide shortage in America. Read the full article.

Ukraine’s reconstruction conference

PHOTO: AFP
Ukraine will be rebuilt, and the West will fund it. That is likely to be the message emanating from the Ukraine Recovery Conference which starts in Lugano, Switzerland, on Monday.

At the start of June, the Kyiv School of Economics estimated that physical damage to Ukraine amounted to $104bn. On top of that come losses of life and economic output, missed trade revenues and investment, additional spending on the military and assistance for the 6.3m internally displaced citizens. The overall impact is grim. The IMF reckons that Ukraine’s GDP could shrink by more than a third this year, a blow on a par with America’s Great Depression in the 1930s.

Promising money for the future is straightforward. More urgent is funding Ukraine’s long war effort and bolstering its finances today. The central bank has been printing money at alarming rates to plug budget holes. Inflation, already 18%, is rising. The Lugano conference has its work cut out.


A new government in India’s richest state

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Recently in Maharashtra—the Indian state home to Mumbai and Bollywood—politicians, rather than films, have supplied the drama. On June 29th the state’s chief minister, Uddhav Thackeray, resigned. He was replaced the next day by Eknath Shinde, formerly one of Mr Thackeray’s cabinet ministers, now leading a breakaway faction.

For eight days, Mr Shinde and colleagues, supported by India’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (at the time the opposition in Maharashtra), were holed up in a hotel in Guwahati, a city more than a 1,000 miles from the state, beyond the reach of party bosses. There they spun a plot which looks to have succeeded. On Monday Mr Shinde’s new government faces a vote of confidence, which it is expected to secure comfortably.

His revolt will have implications beyond the state. The new government’s alliance with the BJP will strengthen the ruling party, now in power in 18 of India’s 28 states. And ahead of national elections in 2024, it will further demoralise the country’s hapless opposition.

Chile’s new constitution

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Chile’s constitutional convention has been at work for a year. On Monday, it will formally present its work to the nation. The new document comes from turmoil: the body that drafted it was elected in the wake of huge protests against inequality and poor public services in 2019. If approved in a referendum in September, the constitution would replace Chile's current charter, drafted under the military dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet.

The new text would give the state a greater role in providing services, expand labour rights, require at least half the legislature and judiciary to be women, recognise indigenous lands and decentralise power. Yet polls show that most Chileans plan to reject it. Self-inflicted scandals (one convention member lied about having cancer) and fake news (including claims the constitution abolishes rights to private property) have hurt its reputation. Gabriel Boric, the recently elected leftist president, must hope things change once the referendum campaign gets underway. Having backed the new constitution, his government’s survival may rest on its success.

The Saudi bourse looks to the future

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A decade ago, foreigners could not even directly buy shares on Saudi Arabia’s stock market. Now they can do that, and much more. On Monday the Tadawul will launch trading in single-stock futures, another step in the rapid transformation of the bourse. Since 2015 the kingdom has allowed big foreign investors into the market and eased caps on ownership. By the end of this March, such firms owned 318bn rials ($85bn) in the exchange, up from 103bn two years earlier.

Foreigners still control only a fraction of the market. Some of the biggest firms on the index, like SABIC, a petrochemicals giant, are majority-owned by the government. Others are controlled by prominent families. But opening the market has been good for Saudis and foreigners alike. Big firms have access to much needed capital from abroad. And investors have earned better returns than in sluggish Western markets. The Tadawul gained 5% over the past year. The Dow lost 10%.


CERN goes beyond the Higgs boson

PHOTO: PIOTR TRACZYK/CERN
Ten years ago on Monday, scientists at CERN, the European particle physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland, announced that experiments at their Large Hadron Collider had found the elusive Higgs boson. This was proof of the existence of a force field which permeates the universe, and gives all other known particles their mass. It was the final piece of the Standard Model, the scientific theory that, for now, best describes the properties and behaviour of all known matter and forces. But it leaves most of the universe unexplained—it cannot, for example, account for gravity, dark energy or dark matter.

Since December 2018, the LHC has been switched off, as it underwent upgrades to make it more powerful. On Tuesday, collisions will resume. Physicists have a raft of recently uncovered anomalies to explore. Investigating them could be the doors through which they can access a much-sought-after goal: finding physics beyond the Standard Model.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: In which city is there a statue of Hans Christian Andersen in the Rosenborg Castle Gardens?

The life of the nation is secure only while the nation is honest, truthful, and virtuous.

Frederick Douglass
