The world in brief
July 28, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

America’s economy grew by 2.4% at an annualised rate in the second quarter, beating economists’ expectations of 1.8%. The increase was spurred by strong consumer spending and a surge in private investment. The surprising resilience of America’s economy is good news for policymakers. Inflation is easing too: consumer prices rose by just 3% in June, the smallest increase in over two years. On Wednesday Jerome Powell, chair of America’s central bank, said that he no longer expects the country to fall into a recession this year.

Niger’s military leadership announced its support for a coup against Mohamed Bazoum, the country’s president. A group of soldiers had announced a takeover on national television on Wednesday; they closed the country’s borders and imposed a nationwide curfew. Mr Bazoum vowed on X (formerly Twitter) to defend the country’s “hard-won” democracy. The coup will complicate Western efforts to help Niger stem attacks by insurgent groups in the country.

António Guterres, the UN secretary-general, warned that the “era of global boiling” has arrived, after scientists said that it is “extremely likely” that July will be the world’s warmest month on record. Global mean temperature briefly exceeded the 1.5℃ threshold above pre-industrial levels during the first and third week of the month. Greenhouse gas emissions are in large part to blame.

American regulators proposed new rules that would require banks to collectively set aside billions of dollars in capital to cushion against risk. Lenders with at least $100bn in assets would be subject to the new rules, which are sent to be finalised next year and will include elements of Basel III, an international capital-adequacy standard that America has been slow to implement.

The European Central Bank raised interest rates by a quarter-percentage point, taking its benchmark rate to 3.75%—its highest in over two decades. Although inflation in Europe is easing, the bank did not rule out further rate hikes. In June the annual inflation figure was 5.5%, down from an all-time peak of 10.6% in October 2022.

Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, pledged to deliver between 25-50,000 tonnes of free grain each to six African countries in the coming months. In his opening speech at the Russia-Africa summit Mr Putin defended his recent withdrawal from the Black Sea grain initiative. Russia is battling for influence in Africa, but many of the continent’s leaders are unwilling to throw their weight behind the declining global power.

The European Commission launched an antitrust probe into Microsoft over the bundling of Teams, a conferencing service, with its other products. These include Office 365, a web-based suite for businesses. The investigation into “anti-competitive tying” follows a complaint by Slack, a messaging app. The antitrust investigation is the EU’s first into the American company in more than a decade.

Figure of the day: $28m, the amount that Russia gave to African countries in bilateral aid in 2018. This is less than one-hundredth of Britain’s total. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ukraine harnesses its past to save its future
On Friday Ukraine celebrates Statehood Day. July 28th—which marks the anniversary of the Christianisation of the Kyivan Rus, a mediaeval federation of eastern Slavic princedoms—has long been celebrated as Baptism Day in Ukraine and Russia. Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, has repeatedly invoked the occasion to promote ideas of a shared past. But in 2021 Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, rebranded the day to emphasise his country’s unique history. Ukraine was not created in 1991, tweeted the foreign ministry last year, but 1,000 years before.

Since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine last year, Mr Zelensky’s propaganda department has drawn on the past to unify his country, suggesting that Ukrainians are the heirs of Cossack warriors “who fought for the freedom of the Ukrainian people”. He may invoke such ideas again. On Wednesday, after eight weeks of slow progress, Ukraine launched a new phase of its counter-offensive, including big pushes to the south and east. Today’s fight for freedom continues.


PHOTO: ALAMY
ExxonMobil mines new profits
On Friday ExxonMobil will release its earnings for the second quarter. They will show that America’s largest oil-and-gas company has shifted down a gear. This month the firm said it expected net profit would fall to $7.8bn, from $17.9bn in the same period last year. Russia’s war in Ukraine sent oil and gas prices sky-high in 2022 and consequently boosted Exxon’s profits to record levels. But a global economic slowdown and growing supply from producers such as Brazil and Guyana have tranquilised oil markets.

Exxon is looking for side hustles. Last week the company laid out plans for a lithium-processing facility in Arkansas, which could supply an annual 110,000 tons of the metal used for electric-car batteries—roughly 15% of last year’s global production. And earlier in July it agreed to pay $4.9bn for Denbury, an oil-and-gas firm with a budding business to capture carbon dioxide. As hydrocarbon sales sputter, Exxon will need these new engines of growth.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The French economy resists
War in Europe continues to squeeze its economy. Unlike Germany, however, France has so far managed to avoid a recession. On Friday second-quarter figures are expected to show modest GDP growth, after a quarterly expansion of 0.2% at the start of the year. France owes its resilience in part to greater self-reliance in energy, and the government has spent heavily to protect consumers. Monthly inflation, also released on Friday, will probably show that has kept energy prices down. Indeed, over the past five years the French economy has outperformed the larger German one, partly thanks to France’s big luxury and defence firms.

But now the French government is phasing out its energy-bill caps that have been in place since 2021. From next Tuesday electricity bills will be allowed to rise by 10%. Bruno Le Maire, the finance minister, stresses that the French are still better protected than their neighbours. That may offer little comfort to those who see their budgets squeezed.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Bank of Japan teases markets
For the past year and a half central banks around the world have rapidly raised interest rates to fight surging inflation. The Bank of Japan is the odd one out: it kept its benchmark rate at an ultra-low -0.1% and maintained its yield-curve control policy, which caps the ten-year government-bond yield below 0.5%.

That could change on Friday, however, when the BoJ announces its latest monetary-policy decisions. Economists at Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan, for example, expect a shift. Prices, excluding fresh food and energy, rose by 3.3% year-on-year in June, well above the BoJ’s target of 2%. In the face of increasingly sticky inflation, the BoJ may raise or abandon the cap on the ten-year bond, or shift to capping shorter-term yields instead. But the decision looks like a toss-up, with some analysts expecting the BoJ to hold off until later in the year.


PHOTO: MAGNOLIA PICTURES / DOGWOOF
Transgender sex workers on screen
A documentary that digs into some of the thorniest issues in the culture wars is released in American cinemas on Friday (and in Britain next week). “Kokomo City”, directed by D Smith, a music-producer-turned-filmmaker, follows four black transgender sex workers in Atlanta and New York City. Through interviews shot in sobering monochrome, the trans women dissect black culture, secret fetishes, taboos and the perpetual violence they face. Earlier this year the film won awards at both the Sundance Film Festival and the Berlin International Film Festival.

Alas, one of the protagonists will not see the film’s release. In April Koko Da Doll was fatally shot in south-west Atlanta. An analysis from UCLA Law School found that transgender Americans are over four times more likely than their cisgender peers to be victims of violent crime. “Kokomo City” brings both their smiles and struggles to the screen.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which 1976 film featured Walter Matthau as the coach of a youth baseball team?
Thursday: Which Vincent Price horror movie was remade in 1986 by David Cronenberg with Jeff Goldblum in the lead?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Gareth Davies, Burnham-on-Crouch, Britain

Alice Li Hagan, Honolulu, Hawaii, America

Andy Cayley, Mt Claremont, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Narendra Modi, Nissan, Dolly, Israel. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

If every conceivable precaution is taken at first, one is often too discouraged to proceed at all.

Archer John Porter Martin
