The world in brief
April 18, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A Russian court sentenced Vladimir Kara-Murza, a political dissident and critic of the Kremlin, to 25 years in jail on charges of treason and deliberately spreading falsehoods about the army. Mr Kara-Murza is a vocal opponent of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The sentence is the harshest since the start of the war, which triggered a crackdown on civic activism in Russia. Mr Kara-Murza denied all accusations.

The EU’s ambassador in Sudan was reportedly assaulted at his home in Khartoum, the capital, as fighting between the ruling military junta and the Rapid Support Forces, a militia, continued for a third day. At least 180 people have been killed so far, according to the UN. On Monday General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, the country’s de-facto leader, labelled the RSF a rebel group.

The banking arm of Charles Schwab, an American brokerage giant, announced that customer deposits had fallen by 11% in the first quarter to $325.7bn, matching analysts’ expectations. Schwab’s net income rose to $1.6bn, a 14% rise. This week dozens of American mid-size banks will report earnings, in the first set of quarterly results after the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank.

American prosecutors charged two men with acting as Chinese-government agents for operating a secret police station in New York to intimidate dissidents. One of the defendants allegedly helped find a Chinese pro-democracy activist and threatened a Chinese fugitive in America with the goal of getting him to return home. China is said to operate more than 100 overseas police stations in 53 countries.

The British Parliament’s standards committee made public that it is investigating Rishi Sunak, the country’s prime minister, over a failure to declare a financial interest. Mr Sunak allegedly neglected to mention his wife’s ownership of shares in Koru Kids, a childcare company, when discussing increasing funding for childcare. The committee opened the probe on April 13th.

Slovakia joined Hungary and Poland in imposing a ban on imports of Ukrainian grain. The EU warned against unilateral trade action; a spokesperson for the bloc said individual member states could not make trade-policy decisions. The bans were implemented to protect farmers from a glut of cheap grain from Ukraine. Bulgaria said it is also considering halting imports.

Sega, a Japanese video-game giant, offered to buy Rovio, the maker of the popular mobile game Angry Birds, for around €706m ($776m). Sega is hoping that smartphone games will provide long-term growth after the covid pandemic caused a drop in the number of pachinko and arcade-machine players, Japan’s traditional money-spinner. Rovio shares rose by about 20% during morning trading in Europe.

Fact of the day: $190bn, the combined revenues of the “big four” accountancy firms last year, up from $134bn in 2017. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Apple opens its first Indian outlet
The first Apple store in India—staffed by attendants speaking 20 languages—will open on Tuesday in Mumbai, adorned with stone from Rajasthan and timber tiles from Delhi (where the second store will open on Thursday). The glitzy shop reflects Apple’s high hopes for India, where it has two targets.

First, the consumer. The iPhone makes up less than 5% of the Indian smartphone market. But as India’s 1.4bn people get richer they are upgrading their handsets. In February Apple reported double-digit revenue growth in the country, with Tim Cook, its boss, pronouncing himself “very bullish on India”.

Second, manufacturers. Most Apple products are made in China. But covid, cost-inflation and toxic geopolitics have made it a riskier place to do business. By one estimate a quarter of iPhones will be made outside of China by 2025, with India the biggest beneficiary. Narendra Modi, the prime minister, has been spotted with a gold model—and he won’t be the last.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Evan Gershkovich’s lawyers appeal his detention
A Moscow court will hear an appeal on Tuesday from the lawyers of Evan Gershkovich, the Wall Street Journal correspondent currently held in Russia. Mr Gershkovich—who was arrested late last month on espionage charges while on a reporting trip in Yekaterinburg, a city east of Moscow—faces a sentence of up to 20 years. His paper has “vehemently” denied the charges against him; the American government says that Mr Gershkovich is being wrongfully detained.

The chances that his lawyers can convince the court to let him off on bail or house arrest look slim. Mr Gershkovich’s best hope may be a prisoner swap with America. A senior Russian official hinted at such a possibility on April 13th, but said it could only come after the conclusion of the trial, which is likely to take place behind closed doors and is virtually assured to end in a conviction. In his first letter to his parents in America, Mr Gershkovich said that he is “not losing hope”.


PHOTO: ALAMY
The EU and big tech
Representatives from the European Commission will inaugurate the European Centre for Algorithmic Transparency in Sevilla, Spain, on Tuesday. What sounds like yet another AI research institute is destined to become a key actor in enforcing the European Union’s Digital Services Act, which will enter into force in February 2024 and is meant to regulate big social-media and online-search companies.

ECAT is supposed to help regulators in Brussels scrutinise these firms’ algorithms, such as those used to recommend the content in their customers’ feeds and search results. But sceptics think that even that ability will not be enough for the Commission to make sure that big tech businesses, which have many more legal and other resources, will actually comply with the law. They also doubt that ECAT will attract the talent needed to do its job, given the current demand elsewhere for people who know a thing or two about AI.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Brazil’s rioters go on trial
On Tuesday Brazil’s Supreme Court will start judging people over the riots of January 8th, when thousands of supporters of Jair Bolsonaro, a former president, stormed Congress, the presidential palace and the court building. It will assess 100 cases this week, with more to follow. If the court accepts the prosecutors’ complaints, the accused face charges such as “armed criminal association” and incitement of a “coup d’état”.

Mr Bolsonaro was in America during the riots but—after months of questioning the validity of the election he lost—he could also become a defendant. A trial is not yet scheduled and Mr Bolsonaro denies responsibility, but on April 14th a Supreme Court judge ordered him to testify before police.

The court of public opinion seems to have reached its verdict on the riots. Polling in January suggested that 93% of Brazillians condemn the attacks, and 46% think the perpetrators should face justice. The public’s view on Mr Bolsonaro, meanwhile, may not become clear until 2026 when he wants to run for president again.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
The person of Derek Parfit
“Like my cat, I often simply do what I want to do.” This arresting statement opens Derek Parfit’s “Reasons and Persons”. Released in 1984, the book remains one of the most influential works of academic moral philosophy. “Parfit: A Philosopher and His Mission to Save Morality”, a lively new biography by David Edmonds published this week, illuminates the ideas of its author. It reveals Parfit as a bracingly lucid thinker who examined the grounds for human action, and argued that everyone should focus less on their own interests and more on the common good. He was, consequently, a great supporter of the effective altruism movement.

One student interviewed by Mr Edmonds likens Parfit’s tutorials to religious experiences. Others recalled him as the epitome of the eccentric Oxford don. When not trying to reconcile different theories of morality, he rode an exercise bike in the nude and brooded over redesigning Oxford’s street lamps. He was an obsessive photographer, braving frostbite to capture the right image of St Petersburg’s River Neva. He did not own a cat.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: What type of tank has the British government sent to Ukraine?

Monday: Victoria is the capital of which Canadian province?

History repeats itself. That’s one of the things wrong with history.

Clarence Darrow
