The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (05:12 GMT / 13:12 Hong Kong)

Ukrainian forces struck the occupied city of Melitopol in the south-east with a missile barrage. Ukraine also reported that Russian drone attacks had severed power from all but the most critical infrastructure in the southern port city of Odessa. Both sides need more arms. Ukraine’s ambassador in Berlin told Welt am Sonntag, a newspaper, that Germany would send more ammunition and weaponry. Meanwhile, Russia’s former president, Dmitry Medvedev, said that his country was increasing arms production to protect itself from “enemies” in the West.

NASA’s Orion spacecraft returned safely to Earth, concluding the 26-day Artemis I mission to orbit the moon. The unmanned capsule re-entered the atmosphere at 40,000 kph before making a gentle, parachute-assisted splash in the Pacific Ocean. Future missions are expected to carry astronauts, as the American space agency seeks to put humans back on the surface of the moon.

The FBI arrested Abu Agila Masud, a Libyan man accused of making the bomb that blew up a Pan-Am flight over the Scottish town of Lockerbie in 1988. The terror attack killed 270 people. Mr Masud, who was charged for alleged involvement two years ago, was reportedly kidnapped by a militia group in Libya last month and will now be extradited to America where he will face prosecution.

One of the European Parliament’s 14 elected vice-presidents was arrested by Belgian police on suspicion of having taken bribes from an unnamed country. Eva Kaili, a member of Greece’s centre-left coalition, was expelled by her party after police swept up cash worth about €600,000 ($632,000) in raids around Brussels. Unattributed sources told two Belgian outlets that Ms Kaili had been suborned by Qatar.

Several main roads in northern Kosovo that lead to border crossings with Serbia were blocked by protesters for a second day. Albin Kurti, Kosovo’s prime minister, has asked NATO’s peacekeeping force in the region to help remove the barricades. The two countries are holding talks in Brussels amid the latest wave of violence in northern Kosovo.

Amgen, an American biotech company, is reportedly in talks to buy Horizon Therapeutics, according to media reports. The deal would give Amgen access to Horizon’s roster of drugs for autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. It would represent one of the biggest transactions in the pharmaceutical industry this year.

Football World Cup: Football is not coming home to England after they were knocked out by France, the reigning champions. Meanwhile Morocco beat Portugal 1-0 to reach the semi-finals, becoming the first African team ever to reach that late stage of the tournament. Portugal’s loss was the latest in a series of upsets in Qatar.

Fact of the day: $56bn, the projected value in 2030 of the global market for webtoons, a type of South Korean cartoon. Read the full story.

The EU’s strenuous series of summits

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ukraine will once again focus the minds of the EU’s 27 foreign ministers as they gather in Brussels on Monday. National leaders will also convene later in the week. The bloc is looking to adopt its ninth sanctions package against Russia, adding nearly 200 individuals and three banks to its blacklist. It also wants to send €18bn ($19bn) in financial aid to Ukraine.

This may prove tricky. Both the sanctions and the aid require the unanimous approval of EU governments. But Hungary and its autocratic prime minister, Viktor Orban, have threatened to veto both dossiers unless Brussels releases billions of euros in funding earmarked for Hungary (the EU is holding back over concerns around corruption and the independence of the judiciary). The week will be spent trying to cajole Mr Orban into a deal, or finding a way to sidestep Hungary, such as by adopting the measures multilaterally. In either case, the summits could quickly turn hot-tempered.

India’s largest winemaker goes public

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
India is hardly wine country. In most places intense heat hinders production. Many of the country’s states limit or prohibit the sale of alcohol. And where it is allowed, Indians prefer the harder stuff of whiskey and country liquor. But a growing affluent class is acquiring a taste for wine. Over the next three years, the value of India’s wine sales, currently worth $160m, is expected to grow by 23% annually.

Much of that is down to Sula Vineyards, which launches on Mumbai’s stockmarket, the BSE, at a valuation of $353m on Monday. It established its vineyards in 1999 in Nashik, 160km north-east of Mumbai, and has combined clever marketing, which includes running an annual dance-music festival, with sweeter-than-mainstream wines that cater to local tastes. Other vineyards have followed, but Sula still holds more than half the domestic market. Despite turbulence in financial markets that has caused recent IPOs in India to flop, Sula’s owners are hoping that investors will nonetheless take a swig.

Mexico’s president goes after the electoral body

PHOTO: REUTERS
A controversial electoral-reform package, which in mid-November sparked the biggest protests since Andrés Manuel López Obrador became president in 2018, will this week be debated, and perhaps passed, by Mexico’s Senate. The reform, which the lower house rushed through last week, would undermine Mexico’s electoral authority, INE, cutting its budget and weakening its ability to punish breaches of electoral law. Rules on campaigning and propaganda by public servants would also be loosened.

Even though Mr López Obrador had to water down his initial constitutional reform (for lack of the necessary two-thirds majority in parliament) he would see any strike at the INE as a win. He has long alleged—against all evidence—that he lost elections in 2006 and 2012 because the body endorsed fraudulent results. But the reform would be a loss for Mexico. The authoritarian rule of the Institutional Revolutionary Party ended in 2000, after seven decades, thanks to the electoral framework painstakingly built during Mexico’s transition to democracy.

Britain’s cranky labour force

PHOTO: I-IMAGES
Britons weary of the train strikes that have uprooted their daily routines since June will have no holiday respite. The RMT, a trade union representing the country’s transport workers, plans five more work stoppages over the next month. The RMT’s members are unlikely to accept the latest pay offer from their bosses in a ballot that ends on Monday; the union has encouraged them to reject the deal.

Labour unrest is seeping across Britain. Nurses will undertake their largest-ever strike on December 15th and December 20th. Midwives will decide on Monday whether to hold their own walk-out. Some civil servants, some baggage handlers at Heathrow airport and Eurostar security staff also stop work this week. December is on track to become Britain’s most-disrupted month since 1989. Double-digit inflation is largely the culprit as workers battle for larger pay increases to keep pace with the cost of living, as the economy as a whole also slows down.

Homage to an age-old tale

PHOTO: DISNEY
This week a tribute to “Beauty and the Beast”, Disney’s animated film of 1991, will be shown on ABC and Disney+. It will feature clips from the musical, showing off its sumptuous blend of hand-drawn and digital art, and tunes performed by an all-star cast.

The film’s best-known song declares the story to be a “Tale As Old As Time”. It is indeed rather old: a version may have existed in oral form 4,000 years ago. In 1740 Gabrielle-Suzanne de Villeneuve, a French novelist, penned a long account of a reclusive beast and the young woman who falls in love with him. Sixteen years later Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont turned that work into a short fairy tale. Since then it has been adapted into umpteen films—Disney even released a live-action remake, starring actors, in 2017—as well as operas and plays. Its themes, of prejudice, outward appearances and female independence, have resonated through the ages.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which Alexandre Dumas story focuses on the wrongly imprisoned Edmond Dantès?

What is beautiful is moral, that is all there is to it.

Gustave Flaubert
