The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (22:55 GMT / 06:55 Hong Kong)

American stockmarkets leapt after lower-than-expected inflation figures raised hopes that the Federal Reserve will ease its tightening. The big three indices each recorded their best day since 2020, with the tech-heavy NASDAQ Composite climbing by 7.4%. The S&P 500 gained 5.5%. Annual inflation slowed to 7.7% in October, down from 8.2% in September.

Joe Biden and Xi Jinping will meet in person on Monday, for the first time as presidents of America and China. The meeting will take place ahead of the G20 summit in Bali. In a statement the White House suggested the pair will discuss efforts to “maintain and deepen lines of communication” between America and China, as well as how to work together on “transnational challenges”. Earlier, Russian officials confirmed that President Vladimir Putin would not attend the G20 summit.

Ukrainian troops pushed further towards the city of Kherson after Russia said it would withdraw from the occupied regional capital. Ukraine’s forces recaptured 12 surrounding villages and towns including Snihurivka. Yet the country’s army chief said he could still not confirm that Russia was pulling out of Kherson city. Earlier, a high-level Ukrainian official said he saw “no signs that Russia is leaving Kherson without a fight”.

Control of America’s Senate remains on a knife edge after Tuesday’s midterm elections, but the path for Democrats has become clearer. The Democratic candidate holds the lead in Arizona, and postal ballots in Nevada also appear to be going Democrats’ way. In Georgia, another state yet to be called, the election will go to a run-off next month. The House of Representatives is likely to flip to the Republicans.

Sam Bankman-Fried, founder of FTX, the world’s third-largest crypto exchange, apologised for the near-collapse of his firm. In a series of tweets Mr Bankman-Fried vowed to repay users of FTX, which has faced a liquidity crunch and financial difficulties. On Wednesday Binance, the world’s largest crypto exchange, withdrew from talks to buy out FTX, sending crypto prices crashing.

The head of the United Nations Development Programme told delegates at COP27 that more than 50 of the world’s poorest countries were at risk of defaulting on their debt and needed urgent assistance to cope with the climate crisis. Meanwhile, the heads of several African governments said that they must be allowed to use fossil fuels to lift their countries out of poverty.

Elon Musk told Twitter employees at a meeting on Thursday that the social-media firm is seeing a negative cash flow of several billion dollars, according to the New York Times. He reportedly alluded to bankruptcy. In an email to staff he nixed the company’s “work from home forever” policy and set a goal of getting half of Twitter’s revenue from subscriptions.

Fact of the day: 94%, the drop in wealth of Sam Bankman-Fried, a crypto entrepreneur, in a day, from $26bn to less than $1bn—the biggest single-day fall on record. Read the full story.

A sombre Singles’ Day in China

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
“Singles’ Day”, an informal holiday in China that falls on Friday, began as a celebration of those unlucky in love (the date, 11/11, symbolises four single people). Then, over a decade ago Alibaba, an e-commerce giant, helped turn the day into a shopping event. Today most online retailers in China offer sales during the festival and millions of Chinese people splurge on e-commerce websites. But this year the world’s biggest online shopping day will probably be smaller than in 2021.

Harsh covid restrictions in China have dampened consumer sentiment. For the first time in 14 years the value of Alibaba’s sales on Singles’ Day may fall, from a record 540bn yuan (then $85bn) last year to 532bn yuan, according to estimates from Bloomberg. Sporadic lockdowns across the country may even disrupt the logistics networks needed to deliver the goods. Most countries have learned to live with covid. China is doing anything but.


The carbon budget crunch

PHOTO: AP
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2.9trn tonnes of carbon dioxide is the most that can accumulate in the atmosphere for there to be a reasonable chance of avoiding temperature rises beyond 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. The “budget” for 2°C is 3.7trn tonnes. By 2019 around 2.4trn tonnes had already been released.

On Friday the Global Carbon Project, a scientific consortium, will release its annual report on how much the world has left to “spend”. Its calculation is likely to be depressing. Staying within the budget for 1.5°C was only just plausible when the goal was agreed in Paris in 2015. Emissions have continued growing since. But a reminder of just how little is left in the bank should galvanise the negotiators gathered in Egypt for COP27, the UN’s climate summit. They must move to slash emissions now, rather than promise to cut them in the future. And they must start thinking seriously about what to do when the budget for 1.5°C runs out.

Visions of a new world at the Paris Peace Forum

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Many Ukrainians mistrust France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, because until recently he has persisted in talking to Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. But in a speech at the UN in September, Mr Macron explained that his desire for dialogue was part of a search for a new multilateral global order. On Friday he will expound on that vision at the Paris Peace Forum, an annual talking shop in the French capital.

There will, inevitably, be much discussion about how to bring the war in Ukraine to an end. But the forum—slogan: “Riding out the multi-crisis”—will place the conflict alongside other problems such as climate change, food security, covid-19 and internet governance. This is reflected in its list of speakers and panellists, which includes big names from Africa, such as Umaro Sissoco Embaló, the president of Guinea-Bissau, and Asia, such as Kishore Mahbubani, a Singaporean diplomat. Mr Putin also likes to talk about a new multipolar world. The version that will be presented in Paris seems more benign.

Latin America searches for a development banker

PHOTO: ALAMY
Nominations close today for one of Latin America’s top jobs. The Inter-American Development Bank lends about $14bn a year in the region, and advises governments on projects and reforms. In 2020 Donald Trump’s administration defied a convention that the bank’s president should be Latin American and cajoled enough votes to install Mauricio Claver-Carone, an official from America’s National Security Council. Mr Claver-Carone promised improvements, but alienated many shareholders. In September the board sacked him for having an affair with his chief-of-staff, whose salary he had raised (he denies the allegations).

This time Latin America’s governments have put forward strong local candidates. Brazil and Mexico have proposed their central bankers (Ilan Goldfajn and Gerardo Esquivel, respectively). Chile’s candidate is Nicolás Eyzaguirre, a former finance minister. Sergio Massa, Argentina’s economy minister, is keen, though he would struggle to leave his current post given what he calls his country’s “critical” economic situation. Much horse-trading may lie ahead before the board chooses the new president on November 20th.

Storytelling amid censorship in Iran

PHOTO: ©2022 JP PRODUCTION
In October a fire engulfed Evin, Iran’s most notorious prison. The blaze threatened the lives of thousands of inmates, including one of the country’s most prominent directors. Jafar Panahi—who in 2010 was accused of “propaganda against the system” and forbidden from making films or leaving Iran—is one of many film-makers the regime has trapped through house arrests, travel bans or imprisonment. He continued to create and made the internationally acclaimed “Taxi” (2015) and “3 Faces” (2018). In July Mr Panahi was sentenced to six years’ behind bars.

His latest film, “No Bears”, shot in secret before his arrest and released in British cinemas on Friday, draws on his own trials to produce a deft (and surprisingly funny) meta-narrative. Mr Panahi plays himself in this film-about-a-film, which is set either side of Iran’s border with Turkey. By blurring the line between fact and fiction, “No Bears” offers a moving portrait of what it is like to live, and make art, in the face of repression.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which actress married nine times, with husbands including the designer of the Barbie doll and the founder of the Hilton hotel chain?

Thursday: Which rock star appeared with the word “slave” written on his face in protest at his recording contract?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Anand Mahajan, Mumbai, India
North America: Jess Parks, Menlo Park, California, America
Central and South America: Sebastian Agudelo-Restrepo, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic

Europe: Yuliya Gorelkina Hürlimann, Bern, Switzerland
Africa: Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya
Oceania: Kevin Fernandez, Melbourne, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of conglomerate, credit, ozone and Europe. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

We are what we pretend to be, so we must be careful about what we pretend to be.

Kurt Vonnegut
