The world in brief
August 9, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, told the BBC that Wagner, a Russian mercenary group, is “taking advantage” of the situation in Niger. Members of the Nigerien junta have reportedly asked for help from Wagner, which has operated in neighbouring Mali since a military coup there in 2021. Earlier, Niger’s new leaders rejected diplomatic efforts by members of the Economic Community of West African States, saying that popular anger over the bloc’s sanctions made it impossible to welcome the delegation.

American regional-bank stocks dropped after Moody’s, a credit-rating agency, downgraded ten mid-sized lenders. Shares in several banking giants also fell on the news, including in JPMorgan Chase, which dropped by around 2% in early trading. On Monday Moody’s said that the Federal Reserve’s rate-hiking campaign is having a “material impact” on America’s banks, leaving some regional lenders with “sizeable unrealized losses”.

China’s exports and imports fell by more than expected in July. Exports, once a vital contributor to growth, declined by 14.5% year-on-year in dollar terms, the biggest drop since February 2020. China is suffering from slowing growth and dangerously low inflation. Despite the sluggish economy, China’s central bank has been in no rush to provide a stimulus package.

America’s Supreme Court temporarily reinstated the Biden administration’s regulation of “ghost guns”—weapons sold as kits for at-home assembly—after a Texas judge struck it down in July. The rule forces kit-makers and -sellers to treat their products like regular firearms, including by giving them serial numbers. The regulation will remain in place while the Biden administration challenges the Texas ruling in appeals court.

A Belgian arms dealer sold 50 Leopard 1 tanks to a European country, which will export them to Ukraine. The dealer declined to identify the government that purchased them, citing a confidentiality clause. The tanks, an older model than the Leopard 2s Ukraine lobbied for, will be updated with modern weapons systems in Germany and Italy before deploying, according to the Belgian newspaper De Standaard.

Results from a late-stage trial showed that Wegovy, a weight-loss drug, reduces the risk of heart attacks and strokes by up to 20%. Novo Nordisk, the Danish pharmaceutical firm that makes Wegovy, said that it expects to apply for approval for expanded use of the drug in America and the European Union this year. Shares soared by 16% on the news.

Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company announced that it would invest €3.5bn ($3.8bn) in a chip-making factory in Germany. The plant, which will be TSMC’s first in Europe, is set to begin production by the end of 2027. It will provide chips for German carmakers, reducing their reliance on Asian suppliers. The firm has recently begun expanding its chip-making capacities in Japan and America.

Figure of the day: 78%, the proportion of Nigerien respondents that support the actions of the country’s junta, according to canvassing by Premise Data, a polling firm. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China’s deflationary predicament
In recent years, policymakers in most of the world’s big economies have faced a stagflationary dilemma. They have wrestled both with high inflation, which demands steep interest rates, and fears of a recession, which would normally call for monetary easing.

The exception is China. It is struggling with both slowing growth and dangerously low inflation. Exports, a once vital contributor to growth, shrank by over 14% year-on-year in July. And figures released on Wednesday are likely to show that consumer-price inflation turned negative last month.

In response, China’s central bank has cut interest rates by only 0.1 percentage points. Its timidity is puzzling. China’s deflationary predicament should not pose a policy dilemma. The textbook response to weak growth and inflation is monetary easing. That is what some scolds call the “easy way out”. But as the economist James Galbraith once said, “I definitely favour the easy way out when it is available.”


PHOTO: AP
Singapore struggles for civic pride
Singapore turns 58 years old on Wednesday, but this year the national-day celebrations will be gloomier than usual. An absence of households displaying the flag has been noticed by political commentators. People are struggling with the cost of living: headline annual inflation hit 6.5% in February—driven by increasing food, transport and house prices—before easing to 4.5% in June.

But Singaporeans have also been shocked by a slew of scandals. In July they woke to news of a graft probe involving the transport minister. That was followed by news of an affair between the then speaker of Parliament and a fellow lawmaker. Only days earlier two cabinet ministers were cleared of wrongdoing over the renting of colonial-era mansions. The story looks bad in a country where cramped Singaporeans grapple with finding affordable housing.

Lee Hsien Loong, the prime minister, says that the solution to graft lies not with more checks and balances, but with more honest people. That might be placing too much faith in human nature.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Biden hawks his climate legislation
On Wednesday, President Joe Biden will speak in Albuquerque, New Mexico, to promote his climate policies. Mr Biden is touring the south-western states of Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah—some of those most vulnerable to hotter temperatures—to impress voters with the scale of his efforts. Earlier this week, his administration announced it would designate almost 1m acres around the Grand Canyon as a national monument, making permanent a twenty-year moratorium on mining there. That should please environmentalists and local Native American leaders, who have long lobbied for the designation.

Mr Biden will talk up the Inflation Reduction Act, which contains nearly $400bn in subsidies for green tech over ten years. He has his work cut out. Polls show that while most Americans want action on climate change, they are unhappy with how Mr Biden is handling it. That may be because over 70% have heard little to nothing about the IRA. Having passed one of the largest green bills in decades, Mr Biden must now sell it to Americans.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America expands veterans benefits
The service members had breast cancer, kidney diseases, Parkinson’s; their babies were born prematurely. All had lived at Camp Lejeune, a Marine Corps base in North Carolina, between the 1950s and 1980s, where a nearby dry-cleaner had improperly dumped chemicals, contaminating the water supply. Others—veterans of wars in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq—contracted asthma, heart disease and lung cancer. They blamed exposure to smouldering burn pits, for years the American armed forces’ preferred waste-disposal method.

The military has historically been wary of admitting fault (and thus paying out disability claims). But the PACT Act, passed last year, accepts that certain illnesses are caused by burn pits or water contamination. One such disease is glioblastoma, the aggressive brain cancer that killed Joe Biden’s son, Beau, a veteran who was exposed to burn pits in Iraq and Kosovo. If service members file their disability claims by Wednesday, they can collect retroactive payments owed for 2022. The legislation, which allocates $797bn for veterans benefits over a decade, is the most generous yet.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Disney deals with strikes and succession
On Wednesday Disney, the world’s biggest entertainment company, will report its quarterly earnings amid disruption across the industry. Hollywood’s actors and writers are on strike, meaning filming has halted. Even finished pictures are in peril: Disney must decide whether to postpone titles like “The Marvels”, due in the autumn, in case its stars Brie Larson and Samuel L. Jackson are still unavailable to promote it.

A different question hovers over another Disney star. Bob Iger, who had a stellar 15 years as chief executive until 2020, returned last year after his successor, Bob Chapek, proved a dud. Mr Iger said he would stay for two years to find a replacement, but his contract has already been extended to four. Tom Staggs and Kevin Mayer, former heirs-apparent who left Disney after missing out on the top job, are back in the picture having been re-engaged as consultants. Time for a casting decision.



Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which actor starred as Norman Bates in the 1998 remake of “Psycho”, the Hitchcock classic movie?

Tuesday: What is the Latin word for “right” as in “turn right”?

Everything becomes a little different as soon as it is spoken out loud.

Hermann Hesse
