The world in brief
August 3, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Russian drones damaged a Ukrainian port in Izmail, a city on the Danube near the border with Romania. In July Russia withdrew from an agreement under which it allowed Ukraine to export grain by ship across the Black Sea; since then its air force has been targeting Ukrainian ports. The attack on Izmail damaged nearly 40,000 tonnes of grain destined for Africa, China and Israel. Wheat futures in Chicago, the global benchmark, rose by 4% following the strike.

A jury in Pennsylvania decided that Robert Bowers, the white supremacist who killed 11 people and wounded six more at a Pittsburgh synagogue in 2018, should receive the death penalty. In June Mr Bowers was found guilty on all 63 federal charges against him, including hate crimes. Appeals will probably delay—potentially by years—an execution. The massacre was the deadliest anti-semitic attack in American history.

Police in Brazil killed at least nine people in a raid targeting drug gangs. The operation, in Rio de Janeiro, followed similar raids in the states of São Paulo and Bahia. Since Friday more than 40 people have been killed and over 50 arrested. Brazil’s justice minister said the raid in São Paulo, sparked by the murder of an officer, was not “proportionate” to the crime.

Pheu Thai, the party that came second in Thailand’s election in May, has nominated as prime minister Srettha Thavisin, a businessman and party member. The coalition would exclude the party which came first, Move Forward, whose leader, Pita Limjaroenrat, has twice since tried to become prime minister, only to be vetoed by the military-appointed Senate.

China unveiled tax-relief measures designed to help the country’s small businesses, which are struggling to cope with weak domestic consumption. Meanwhile, an exemption from value-added tax for companies that take in less than 100,000 yuan ($13,900) a month in sales was extended until 2027. After an initially buoyant recovery from the pandemic, China’s economy has faltered in recent months.

China’s internet watchdog proposed rules to limit the time children under 18 spend using their phones to a maximum of two hours a day. Phones would have to include a “minor mode”, which would make them inoperable from 10pm to 6am and restrict children’s internet use. In 2021 China restricted the time children could play online games to three hours a week.

Kyriakos Mitsotakis, Greece’s prime minister, said that tourists who fled wildfires on Rhodes this summer would be given a free holiday next year. Last week temperatures in Greece rose above 40°C (104°F). Blazes killed five people and destroyed vast tracts of forest; over 30,000 tourists and locals were evacuated from the islands of Corfu, Evia and Rhodes. That has threatened Greece’s tourist economy.

Figure of the day: 75%, the percentage increase in deaths from armed violence in the Sahel last year. This year looks as if it will be bloodier still. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Republicans rally around Donald Trump
On Thursday Donald Trump is expected to be arraigned in federal court in Washington, DC, facing new charges over the most serious of his alleged crimes: the attempt to overturn the legitimate results of the 2020 election. Yet any hope that criminal indictments against Mr Trump would break his near-decade-long stranglehold on the Republican Party have now been dashed not once, or twice—but thrice.

The former president is once again basking in good feelings. “Thank you to everyone!!! I have never had so much support on anything before,” he wrote online. After he was indicted by New York prosecutors over alleged campaign-finance misconduct in March, he enjoyed a surge in the polls. In June, he was indicted over retaining highly classified intelligence; after leaving the federal courthouse in Miami, he casually stopped by a famous Cuban restaurant.

Republican strategists predict the indictments will either do nothing to imperil Mr Trump or will simply grow his base of support. There is a hydra-like quality to his appeal within his party: for every head that prosecutors attempt to decapitate, two more appear in its place.


The Bank of England’s conundrum
Most economists expect Britain’s monetary policymakers on Thursday to raise the base interest rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 5.25%. That would follow similar moves by central banks in America and Europe last week and take the cost of borrowing to its highest level in 15 years.

House prices have fallen by 3.8% since last year, a sign that rising rates are taking a toll. But after nearly two years of tightening, there remains pressure to turn the screws further still. The economy continues to prove resilient while Britain suffers from the highest inflation rate among G7 countries, despite a larger-than-expected drop last month. Mortgage approvals rose in June and net consumer borrowing recently hit a five-year high.

As a result, markets have not ruled out the possibility that the bank goes further and raises rates by half a percentage point. With few tools at its disposal, the Bank of England must execute a delicate balancing act of tackling inflation without driving the economy into recession.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A shaky peace for Filipino Muslims
On Thursday around 1,300 Muslim guerrillas will turn in their weapons as part of a process to end decades of rebellion in the Philippines. The former fighters belong to the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, which had been battling for an independent homeland in the south of the predominantly Christian country.

In 2014 the Front agreed to settle for greater autonomy for an area known as Bangsamoro. The region now has its own parliament. The government and the fighters’ leaders are now rushing to finish disarming as many as 40,000 guerrillas—and turning them into civilians—before elections due in May 2025. Help with new livelihoods is offered to those who put down arms.

But the peace is precarious. In June, government forces killed seven members of the Front; the group says they were mistaken for members of other armed bands. A yet greater threat comes from fighters professing allegiance to Islamic State. The jihadis briefly seized the city of Marawi in 2017 and still yearn for a Southeast Asian caliphate.



PHOTO: ALAMY
Amazon’s post-pandemic struggles
On Thursday Amazon, the world’s largest online retailer, will report its second-quarter results. Analysts think sales rose by a meagre 8% year on year, not counting those of its cloud division. That is a fraction of the 42% gain it reported for the same quarter in 2020. Back then, with lockdowns forcing consumers to move much of their spending online, pundits foresaw a golden age for e-commerce. The reality has been less lustrous.

After jumping from 12% to 16% in early 2020, the share of all retail sales made online in America has stagnated at 15%. It is now roughly where it would have been had the pre-pandemic trend continued uninterrupted.

To boost growth Amazon has been expanding grocery shopping. But progress has been slow. Selling groceries is a low-margin business. Delivery costs make online grocery sales a loss-making proposition unless extra fees are added. The speedy rise of e-commerce may be entering a more sluggish phase.


PHOTO: WILL PALMER / SWPIX.COM
World cycling in Scotland
Some cycling events, such as the Tour de France, draw huge crowds. Others, like artistic cycling, where riders perform handstands on handlebars, do not. Consolidation can help those formats that struggle for media coverage.

The Union Cycliste Internationale, the governing body, has opted to roll the world championships of 13 separate disciplines, from BMX to cross-country racing, into a single event. Beginning on Thursday the Cycling World Championships will be contested in Glasgow and across Scotland for 11 days. Some events will also serve as qualifiers for the Olympics in Paris in 2024.

Familiar faces in the velodrome will include Harrie Lavreyson of the Netherlands, an Olympic and four-time world champion in the men’s sprint. Annemiek van Vleute, the all-time-great Dutch road cyclist, will also be competing. There may even be an appearance in the men’s road race from Tadej Pogacar of Slovenia, straight from his second-place finish in the Tour de France.


Daily Quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: What was the name of the “paranoid android” in “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy” series?

Wednesday: Which businessman served as Secretary of commerce during the Trump administration?

Before Man goes to the stars he should learn how to live on Earth.

Clifford D Simak
