The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (21:43 GMT+1 / 04:43 Hong Kong)

All nine members of the House committee investigating the attack of January 6th 2021 on America’s Capitol voted to subpoena Donald Trump. The former president is “required to answer for his actions”, said Bennie Thompson, the chairman. “We want to hear from him.” They are unlikely to: Mr Trump will probably not comply. Liz Cheney, another committee member, said criminal referrals for “multiple individuals” were being considered.

The EU’s top diplomat, Josep Borrell, said the bloc will set up camps in Poland and Germany to train thousands of Ukrainian soldiers, as well as boost funding for weapons to more than €3bn ($2.9bn) as Russian attacks escalate. Ukraine was shelled across more than 40 cities and towns on Thursday, according to local officials. Meanwhile Russia warned of a “guaranteed escalation to a world war three” if the country was admitted to NATO.

American stockmarkets shrugged off higher-than-expected inflation figures released on Thursday, with the S&P 500 climbing by 2.6%. Last month the consumer price index rose by 0.4% compared with August. Core prices, which exclude food and energy, increased by 0.6% month on month. Investors are all but certain that the Federal Reserve will deliver yet another jumbo rate increase next month.

The Russian-installed leader of Kherson, in southern Ukraine, told civilians to evacuate to Russia amid Ukraine’s counter-offensive. Vladimir Saldo suggested residents “save themselves”, claiming that cities in Kherson were under attack from Ukrainian missiles; Kyiv has denied targeting its own citizens. The deputy prime minister in Moscow pledged to help people leave Kherson safely and provide them with free accommodation.

Netflix said its forthcoming ad-supported offering would cost $6.99 a month in America. The new tier will be available in 12 countries starting next month. Four to five minutes of ads will accompany each hour of programming. The streaming firm, which lost subscribers in the first half of the year, wants to attract customers on lower budgets.

A jury in Florida sentenced the gunman in the Parkland shooting in 2018 to life in prison without the chance of parole. Nikolas Cruz, aged 24, pleaded guilty last October to premeditated murder of 14 students and three teachers at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, in what was the deadliest school shooting in America to go to trial.

Researchers from Oxford University have discovered that covid vaccines are more effective in people with a genetic variant called HLA-DQB1*06. They were 37% less likely to become infected than those without the gene during a 500-day follow up period. About 30-40% of Europeans carry the gene. Knowledge of its role in the immune response can lead to better vaccines.

Fact of the day: 1,982 tonnes, an estimate for the record quantity of cocaine produced in 2020. Read the full story.

Wall Street banks report

PHOTO: REUTERS
Banks are unusual companies. Rising interest rates and slowing growth are a double-whammy for other firms, driving up costs and hurting revenues. But higher rates are a boon for banks, who make money on the spread they can charge between the cost of borrowing funds and lending them out (called net interest income, or NII). This swells with higher interest rates.

The question is whether high NII offsets sluggishness elsewhere in the business and rising costs. Eventually high rates and slow growth will cause loan losses to rise, which banks must account for by setting aside buffers. Investment banking activity—like mergers and acquisitions or IPOs—is still dormant. But trading activity was probably strong in still volatile markets. On Friday JP Morgan Chase, Citigroup and Morgan Stanley report their third-quarter earnings. Analysts seem to think the good might outweigh the bad. JPM, for example, is expected to earn close to $3 a share, around 10-15% higher than in the first two quarters of the year.

Georgia’s Senate candidates debate

PHOTO: EPA
A highly anticipated debate between the two candidates for a Senate seat in Georgia will take place on Friday. Raphael Warnock, the Democratic incumbent and a reverend, has long been keen to contrast his oratorical skills with Herschel Walker, a Republican former American footballer who is a singularly untalented communicator. Mr Walker, who tried for months to shirk the debate, is mired in several scandals. The latest, in which he reportedly paid for an ex-girlfriend’s abortion despite his avowedly pro-life stance, has rocked the campaign.

The race for governor of Georgia, though, looks good for the Republicans, with Brian Kemp leading Stacey Abrams in the polls. That the Senate race favours Mr Warnock is a reflection of his abilities as a politician but also of his exceptionally weak opponent. Overall control of the Senate after the November 8th midterms may be decided by the good people of Georgia—and thus the poor nomination decisions of its state Republican Party.

For more about the midterms and the race to control Congress, explore our model.


Haiti’s criminal chaos

PHOTO: AP
The UN is considering whether to send troops to Haiti following a request last week by the government. Ariel Henry, the prime minister, has asked for a “specialised armed force” to help crack down on criminal gangs. America has sent a coastguard vessel to patrol Haitian waters, and promised more aid. But it has stopped short of committing manpower.

Never stable, since the assassination of Jovenel Moïse, the president, in July 2021, Haiti has descended into chaos. The gangs blockade fuel distribution and murder people with impunity. The new school term has been postponed. Hospitals lack supplies. Cholera has broken out.

Yet Mr Henry’s request is controversial. The prime minister, installed as acting president after Mr Moïse’s death, has little legitimacy and Haitians have taken to the streets calling for his resignation. And Haitians were bruised by the experience of 2004 to 2017, when soldiers participating in a UN peacekeeping mission introduced cholera and sexually abused Haitian girls. For all that, Haiti’s situation is so dire that such a record may have to be overlooked.

Burkina Faso’s putschists make a plan

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On September 30th Burkina Faso suffered its second coup this year. Captain Ibrahim Traoré declared he was forced to take action because the strongmen who overthrew the elected government in January were failing to stop the region’s jihadists, loosely affiliated to al-Qaeda and Islamic State, from wreaking havoc. The earlier putschists had made the same claim of the regime they usurped.

As their coup-mongering predecessors did, the soldiers have convened a conference with political parties and some NGOs, which begins on Friday. In theory, its participants will draw up a transitional charter and select a transitional president. In practice, the men with guns will decide who is in charge: perhaps Captain Traoré himself will simply carry on.

The last putschists promised to hand back power to civilians by July 2024. Captain Traoré has suggested he will stick to that deadline. In any case, with the army divided and jihadists poised to take advantage, events could overtake even the best laid plans.

A mountain race against climate change

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A Himalayan race to raise awareness of climate change is under way in Bhutan. For five days until Monday, 29 elite runners will follow 206km (126 miles) of the “snowman track,” a path forged by yak herders. With an average elevation of 4,270 metres, the inaugural Snowman Race will be one of the hardest ultramarathons in the world.

Conditions in Bhutan are also challenging. On the plus side, it is the world’s only carbon-negative country: its forests absorb three times as much carbon dioxide as the mountain kingdom emits. But rising temperatures are causing havoc. Himalayan glaciers are melting fast; two-thirds may be gone by 2100. That could have devastating consequences, of the sort suffered by Pakistan when melting glaciers recently contributed to terrible floods. Bhutan’s “dragon king”, Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, is a keen conservationist. In backing the Snowman Race he hopes that others—including China and India, Bhutan’s giant, polluting neighbours—will be spurred into action.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which actress, star of the Jurassic World franchise, is the daughter of a famous film director?

Thursday: In the Rastafarian religion, which site is a place of peace and freedom, as opposed to Babylon, its evil alternative?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Swar Sood, Shimla, India
North America: Ivan Grabowski, Westwood, United States
Central and South America: Sebastian Agudelo-Restrepo, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic
Europe: Rasmus Jonlund, Stockholm, Sweden
Africa: Christine Reiter, Tunis, Tunisia

They all gave the correct answers of Ouagadougou, online, Dutch and uncool. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

A people that values its privileges above its principles soon loses both.

Dwight D. Eisenhower
