The world in brief
September 12, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong Un, will meet President Vladimir Putin in “the coming days”, according to the Kremlin. Mr Kim appears to be travelling by armoured train to Vladivostok, in Russia’s Far East, according to Yonhap, a South Korean news agency. Last week American officials reported that the two leaders planned to discuss the provision of weapons by North Korea to aid Russia’s war in Ukraine.

As many as 2,000 people are feared dead in eastern Libya after Storm Daniel caused severe flooding, says Osama Hamad, the prime minister of the east Libyan government. Thousands more have been reported missing since the storm swept away entire neighbourhoods in the city of Derna, where witnesses say the water level reached three metres.

Sweden will increase its defence budget by $2.44bn next year to reach 2.1% of its GDP—just over the target for NATO members, and almost double its spending in 2020. The country shed its military non-alignment in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, but its accession to NATO has been held up by Turkey, a member of the alliance.

Growth in the euro-zone economy is expected to slow to 0.8% in 2023, and 1.3% in 2024, the European Commission forecasts, in a downward revision to its estimate published in May. Weak demand and increasing consumer prices have taken a heavier toll than expected, despite a strong tourism season in many parts of the continent.

Ukrainian forces claimed to have re-taken control of several gas and oil drilling platforms, known as “Boiko Towers”, in the Black Sea close to Crimea. The country’s military intelligence said that regaining the sites, which had been seized by Russia in 2015, deprives Vladimir Putin of the ability to fully control the Black Sea. Moscow has not commented on the reports.

The death toll in Morocco climbed to at least 2,800 on Monday, following a devastating earthquake on Friday night that struck a cluster of villages south of the city of Marrakesh. Rescue teams are still racing to find survivors, but after three days hopes are beginning to fade. The 6.8-magnitude earthquake is the country’s deadliest since 1960.

New covid-19 booster shots have been approved for use in America by the FDA. Coronavirus cases are on the rise again; the updated vaccines, manufactured by Moderna and Pfizer, are effective against the latest variants. The CDC is expected to meet this week to determine how doses will be rolled out and who will be encouraged to get one.

Figure of the day: 35 minutes, the amount of sleep that people in Asian countries miss compared with elsewhere in the world. Read the full story.

Correction: In a previous edition of World in Brief we inaccurately stated that Nancy Pelosi held the position of Speaker of the House longer than any Democrat. In fact, several Democrats held the job for longer than her. Sorry.


PHOTO: AP
Apple bets on its new iPhone
On Tuesday Tim Cook, the boss of Apple, will launch the iPhone 15. Whizzy new features will include a souped-up camera and faster semiconductors. The launch comes after a run of bad news for Apple regarding China, which accounts for a fifth of its revenue and about the same share of its operating income.

In late August Huawei launched its latest Mate smartphones, a high-end range intended to compete with the iPhone. This is a breakthrough for the Chinese tech firm, which has had its access to chipmaking tools, used for the latest handsets, limited by American trade sanctions. Some Chinese government departments have also banned the use of iPhones.

Neither event is likely to hurt Apple in the short term. But investors are concerned that they may signal a nationalistic shift in China. Mr Cook will hope the new iPhone will be enough to tempt Chinese buyers, and keep Apple’s investors happy.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Google’s antitrust trial begins
On Tuesday America’s Department of Justice begins its trial against Google, which it argues illegally obtained dominance in the search market. At the core of the DoJ’s case is the question of whether a deal between Google and Apple is unlawful. For roughly $15bn a year, Google is the default search engine on all of Apple’s devices. Google is also the default on smartphones and tablets that run its own operating system, Android, and on its Chrome browser. As a result Google, the DoJ will claim, is the dominant search engine in the West.

Google argues that it only takes a few clicks for users to switch to a rival search engine and that, in any case, consumers love its service. A ruling may not be reached until next year. But if the judge rules against Google, it could mean a hefty fine or an end to deals like the one with Apple.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Israel’s constitutional crisis
On Tuesday, Israel’s Supreme Court will begin what may be the most fateful case in its 75-year history. The court starts hearing petitions against the government of Binyamin Netanyahu, the prime minister, and an amendment made on July 24th by Israel’s parliament denying the court the power to overturn government decisions on the basis of “reasonableness”.

Israel has no formal constitution. Instead, the Knesset has over the years passed “basic laws” that establish rights. The law passed in July was an amendment to a basic law and part of a controversial legal reform package planned by the government. Israel’s Supreme Court has disqualified legislation in the past, but this is the first time it may disqualify a basic law.

The petitioners in this case argue that it erodes the balance of powers which is fundamental in any democracy. The government insists that a court blocking parliamentary legislation would be proof that judges need to be reined in. Whatever the outcome, Israel is inching towards a constitutional crisis.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Representatives return to a deadline
America’s House of Representatives returns from recess on Tuesday with its work cut out. Before the summer it passed only one of the 12 funding bills it must approve before September 30th to avoid a government shutdown. Disagreements ran along party lines. The most conservative members of the Republican Party, which holds a slim majority, pushed for uncompromising anti-abortion provisions while Democrats bridled at proposed cuts, including to food programmes, that would put spending below the levels agreed on in a debt-ceiling deal in May.

Even if representatives are now feeling more co-operative they might not get the bills approved in time. If the deadline is missed they must pass stop-gap funding measures instead. Kevin McCarthy, the speaker of the House, wants to fund the government until early December. But some hardline Republican representatives are refusing to approve a budget unless they get substantial concessions, including on spending and immigration. Mr McCarthy will need to be very persuasive—or cut a deal with Democrats and risk a backlash from his own party.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Elon Musk: messiah or menace?
Walter Isaacson, author of a bestselling biography of Apple co-founder Steve Jobs, publishes his account of Elon Musk on Tuesday. Although umpteen biographies have been written about Mr Musk—the owner of X (formerly Twitter), founder of SpaceX and boss of Tesla—Mr Isaacson’s is by far the most intimate. Mr Musk allowed his biographer to shadow him for two years, granting access to his family and confidants.

Mr Musk comes over as a man dedicated to a lofty vision for humankind, yet also impulsive, pugnacious and self-destructive. He is propelled by a deep conviction that the world is hurtling towards calamity. His modest goal is to turn humanity into a “multi-planetary species” that could survive extinction on Earth, while also ending its dependence on fossil fuels. This may explain his habit of furiously reprimanding and firing employees he deems incompetent or insufficiently committed. It does not help that Mr Musk, by his own assessment, suffers from Asperger’s syndrome. “He was not hardwired to have empathy,” reckons Mr Isaacson.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: What is the most expensive type of caviar?

Monday: What is the common name for the male reproductive cell, or gamete?

It is better to die for an idea that will live, than to live for an idea that will die.

Steve Biko
