The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 2 hours ago (22:48 GMT+1 / 05:48 Hong Kong)

President Vladimir Putin signed a decree to increase Russia’s armed forces by 137,000 combat personnel to 1.15m. It comes into effect on January 1st, though it is not clear where the extra personnel will come from. Perhaps 15,000 Russians have been killed and 45,000 wounded after six months of war in Ukraine; the war will now depend, in part, on which army can replenish faster. Elsewhere America and the European Union condemned a Russian missile strike on a railway station in eastern Ukraine on Wednesday that killed at least 25 people, including two children. Russia’s defence ministry confirmed the strike, but claimed to have hit a military train.

A federal judge ruled that America’s Department of Justice must release a redacted copy of the affidavit that authorised the raid on Donald Trump’s Florida home earlier this month. The DoJ has until midday on Friday to publish the document, which contains the reasons why investigators believed a crime may have been committed. The FBI seized hundreds of classified records from the former president’s Mar-a-Lago estate during the search.

Twitter must turn over data from an internal review of spam accounts to Elon Musk, a Delaware judge ruled. The social media network analysed 9,000 accounts last year to see how many were run by humans; it must now share the results and selection criteria with the billionaire. Mr Musk is trying to walk away from an agreement to buy Twitter for $44bn, claiming the company lied about the number of bots on its platform. The judge rejected many of his other demands for information, calling them “absurdly broad”.

Marsha Blackburn, an American senator, arrived in Taiwan, marking the third visit by a Washington official this month. Following an earlier visit by Nancy Pelosi, one of America’s most senior legislators, China staged its largest-ever military exercises around Taiwan. In response, the Taiwanese government proposed to spend more than $19bn on defence next year, a 15% increase on the current budget.

Peloton, an American exercise equipment and media company, reported an operating loss of $1.2bn in its fourth quarter as the sale of its home fitness kit flagged. The company’s revenue fell by 28% to $678.7m in the fourth quarter, below analysts’ expectations of $718m. On Wednesday Peloton announced it would sell its products on Amazon to boost sales in America.

President Joe Biden announced a plan for significant student-debt relief, under which up to $10,000 in student loans will be forgiven for each debtor who earns less than $125,000 a year. The relief will go up to $20,000 for those who received federal aid during their education. Many economists fret that debt cancellation can aggravate inflation. But the announcement may come as a political boon for Democrats ahead of November’s mid-term elections.

The Taliban said more than 180 people had been killed and hundreds more injured by floods in Afghanistan this month in an appeal for help from the international community. Heavy rains wrought widespread devastation in the country’s central and eastern provinces, leaving thousands homeless and worsening an already dire economic and humanitarian situation.

Fact of the day: $217.1bn, the amount that American state governments saved in 2021, exceeding the 2019 record by nearly $100bn. Read the full story.

Joe Biden’s long game in Ukraine

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America marked Ukraine’s independence day by announcing its largest package of military aid yet, worth about $3bn, to buy everything from artillery shells to air-defence systems. Unusually, the arms will not come from existing arsenals, but will instead be bought from industry. Some might not arrive for three years. The aid will do nothing to break the current stalemate after half a year of fighting. Instead, America is signalling a years-long commitment to Ukraine, thereby seeking to frustrate Russia’s hope of prevailing in a drawn-out conflict.

Fear of escalation explains America’s caution in not sending more potent weapons to Ukraine more quickly. But a long game carries other risks. European allies might break ranks when energy shortages begin to hurt this winter. America’s will to bankroll Ukraine may weaken, particularly if America-first devotees control Congress after the midterms in November. And a long war will prolong the agony of Ukraine.

Italy papers the town with posters

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Friday brings the beginning of Italy’s general election campaign: the day it becomes legal to smother towns and cities with election posters. Notwithstanding television and social media, fly-posting is an important part of Italian elections, as are mass rallies. Polls point to a dramatic outcome: the election, for the first time in post-war western Europe, of a government led by a party rooted in the traditions of a pre-war dictatorship.

The latest surveys give the Brothers of Italy, heirs to the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement, around 25% of the vote. Their allies in the hard-right Northern League and Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia party could together get a further 25%, enough for a commanding parliamentary majority. On Thursday the outgoing prime minister, Mario Draghi, warned his successors that distancing Italy from the EU would weaken its economy and international standing. But Italian voters seem ready to dismiss such fears.


A push to pardon Malaysia’s jailed former PM

PHOTO: REUTERS
Najib Razak has begun his 12-year sentence in prison for graft, but will he serve the time? Loyalists, seemingly unperturbed by the former prime minister’s role in a mega-scandal in which $4.5bn was swiped from Malaysia’s state coffers, have mounted protests pushing for a royal pardon. That would let Mr Najib, a smooth political operator, back into parliament and back into favour with some voters. His opponents, keen for Malaysia to move on from the corruption that has damaged the country over the six-decade rule of Mr Najib’s party, the United Malays National Organisation, are collecting signatures against a pardon.

All eyes will now be on King Abdullah, who reigns for the next 18 months in Malaysia’s unusual rotational monarchy (the rulers of each of Malaysia’s states swap the top job between them). His Majesty is the Sultan of Pahang, Mr Najib’s home state, and the two appear friendly. In the grubby world of Malaysian politics, down never means out.

Britain anticipates the chill of winter bills

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Britons face a bleak winter of steeper energy bills. On Friday they find out just how pricey energy will be, when Ofgem, the regulator, updates its cap on how much energy companies can charge most households for electricity and gas. The war in Ukraine has pushed wholesale gas prices to dizzying heights again (prices dropped earlier in the summer). The average household’s annual bill is likely to rise to around £3,600 ($4,260) from October, more than three times the level a year ago.

Labour, the main opposition party, says it would freeze annual bills for six months at £1,971 for the typical household, with the government paying the excess. The idea is popular, but expensive—the state would pay around £6bn towards the bills of the top 20% of earners. A better solution is giving rebates or cash bonuses to the poorest (though targeting help effectively is tricky). If done well, that would encourage people to conserve energy, but still insulate those most in need.

America’s abortions bans proliferate

PHOTO: REUTERS
Two months after America’s Supreme Court ditched the right to abortion, more states are banning the procedure. Thirteen had so-called trigger laws automatically outlawing abortion after Roe v Wade was overturned. On Thursday Tennessee banned abortion without exceptions for rape or incest. Texas also stiffened enforcement of a similar law: doctors now face minimum fines of $100,000 per termination and risk spending life in prison.

But some bans are being fiercely contested. On Wednesday a judge ruled that Idaho’s near-total prohibition, set to take effect this week, violated a federal law requiring hospitals to provide emergency medical care. Court battles have paused abortion bans in Utah, Wyoming and North Dakota, where one such law had been scheduled to take effect on Friday. Still, the list of states with existing or pending bans continues to lengthen: one in three American women of childbearing age now lives in such a place.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: What was the nickname of Tom Cruise’s unfortunate crewmate in the original Top Gun movie?

Thursday: Which 1877 novel by Anna Sewell is considered a classic of children’s literature?

​​​​​​​The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Xiaochen Su, Chiba, Japan

North America: Besty Geist, Seattle, United States

Central and South America: Jorge Ferrando, Santiago, Chile

Europe: Martha Baker, Überlingen, Germany

Africa: Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya

Oceania: Kevin Fernandez, Melbourne, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Raila Odinga, Russia, Obama and Alaska. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

You don't have to have fought in a war to love peace.

Geraldine Ferraro
