The world in brief
April 26, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

President Joe Biden officially launched his campaign for re-election in 2024, four years to the day since he announced his last run. At 80, Mr Biden is the oldest American president to ever launch a bid for a second term. It is unlikely he will face much opposition from within the Democratic Party, which under his stewardship achieved better-than-expected results in last year’s midterms.

Sudan’s warring military factions agreed to a 72-hour ceasefire brokered by America and Saudi Arabia. Some gunfire was reported in Khartoum on Tuesday but civilians have returned to the streets. Many are trying to leave the capital and evacuations of foreigners are under way. The World Health Organisation warned of a “high risk of biological hazard” after fighters seized a laboratory holding samples of polio, cholera and measles.

The Taliban killed the leader of the local Islamic State affiliate that bombed Kabul’s airport in August 2021, a suicide attack that left at least 170 Afghan civilians and 13 American soldiers dead. American officials learned of the killing, which took place in early April, on their own, not from the Taliban.

South Africa’s ruling party said it would withdraw from the International Criminal Court, a month after the Hague-based tribunal issued an arrest warrant for Russia’s president. South Africa has invited Vladimir Putin to a summit in Durban in August and, as a member of the ICC, would be obligated to turn Mr Putin over if he showed up.

The price of First Republic’s shares fell by more than 40%, hitting a record low, one day after the regional American bank reported first-quarter earnings. The lender revealed it lost more than $100bn in deposits after the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank in March. According to Bloomberg, First Republic may sell between $50 and 100bn in securities to restructure its balance sheet.

Police in Turkey detained 110 people accused of links to the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, an armed Kurdish group. Members of the People’s Democratic Party, Turkey’s main Kurdish one, as well as journalists and lawyers, were among those arrested. The arrests come ahead of elections on May 14th, which are set to pose the most significant challenge yet to President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.

Alphabet, Google’s parent company, said first-quarter revenues grew by 3% year over year, to $69.8bn. Net income was $15.1bn. Google’s cloud unit recorded an operating profit, a first since the firm started releasing results for that segment three years ago. Meanwhile Microsoft’s revenue rose by 7% from the same period a year ago, to $52.9bn, beating forecasts. Net income was $18.3bn.

Fact of the day: $7.7bn, the value of global exports of Scottish whisky in 2022. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Biden in 2024
The next American presidential election is likely to feature Joe Biden, who announced his campaign on Tuesday, against Donald Trump. Polls show that 70% of Americans, including 50% of Democrats, do not want the 80-year-old Mr Biden to run again. Many think he is too old. Reluctant Democrats will nevertheless line up behind him; no serious candidates have so far wished to destabilise a sitting president’s campaign.

In theory, sitting presidents run on their records, and Mr Biden’s is strong. He has done more than almost anyone to prevent Russia from taking over Ukraine. He managed to push his industrial policy, aimed at increasing the domestic production of semiconductor chips and decarbonising America’s economy, through a gridlocked Congress. But in practice the performance of the economy and the strength of his campaign will prove more decisive than Mr Biden’s record. The outcome of a Biden-Trump rematch would be more uncertain than it should be.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
South Korea’s complicated friendship with America
While planning his next presidential campaign Joe Biden must also get on with the day job. On Wednesday he will host Yoon Suk-yeol, the first South Korean president to visit in more than a decade. While the two men may smile for the cameras, behind closed doors there will be an airing of grievances.

Mr Biden has been looking to America’s allies, such as South Korea, to help contain China and Russia. America passed legislation last year to get semiconductor, electric vehicle and battery manufacturers to re-route their supply chains through America. But China is South Korea’s largest trading partner by far. And the country grumbles that America’s protectionist measures did not involve proper consultation with Asian allies. South Korea also worries that a stronger material commitment to defend Taiwan could raise the threat from North Korea, which China helps stabilise, including with food aid. Expect some awkward conversations in the Oval Office.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Meta tackles margin pressures
Meta, the parent company of Facebook and Instagram, has been on a rollercoaster ride of late. A slowdown in digital advertising and growing competition from TikTok, a Chinese-owned rival (which several countries including America are considering banning), contributed to its share price falling by almost two-thirds in 2022. Investors have also been sceptical of its focus on the metaverse.

Yet since hitting its nadir in November, the company’s share price has doubled. Investors approve of Mark Zuckerberg’s cost-cutting strategy (Meta’s boss christened 2023 the “Year of Efficiency”). That has included laying off 21,000 staff—almost a quarter of its workforce in 2022—and slashing spending on data centres. Meta’s results, published on Wednesday, will reveal the extent to which the multiple rounds of layoffs have achieved Mr Zuckerberg’s promise of greater nimbleness. After four quarters of decline, Meta’s operating margin is expected to bounce back to growth. If investors like what they see, Meta’s resurgence may well continue.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Boeing slowly climbs back
Boeing’s results, released on Wednesday, are likely to bring another quarter of disappointment for investors after a full-year operating loss of $4.7bn in 2022. Although demand for aircraft is recovering along with a resurgence in air travel as the covid-19 pandemic’s impact wanes, the American aerospace giant is not expected to return to profit. Nonetheless, revenues are expected to exceed those of a year ago, and losses will be lower than in the same period in 2022 after Boeing delivered 130 planes during the first quarter, up by almost a third from a year earlier, and three more than its European rival, Airbus.

But Boeing’s rebound this year is being held down by supply-chain bottlenecks arising from a shortage of skilled labour, among other factors. And more recent problems relate to a supplier of parts for the 737 Max, Boeing’s workhorse short-haul jet, that could affect deliveries to airlines clamouring for new planes.


PHOTO: BACKGRID
A love letter to New York
During the disruption of the pandemic, people were singing dirges for cities. If theatres were dead and work was remote, where would people go with a song and a dream? The bustle of Times Square, and a new musical about the thrill and resilience of the city, suggest the answer will long remain: New York.

Set in 1946, “New York, New York” follows a fraught romance between a singer (Anna Uzele) and a musician (Colton Ryan). It tells of veterans, refugees and other upstarts who make the city hum with their big plans, strong backs and ears for music. Expect to hear the titular anthem made famous by Frank Sinatra, as well as a raft of new ditties from John Kander and Lin-Manuel Miranda. Susan Stroman, who has won five Tony Awards (the Broadway equivalent of an Oscar) for delights including “The Producers” and “Contact”, directs and choreographs this Valentine to the city. “When New York was down and out, I knew it was going to come back,” she says.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Dispur is the capital of which Indian province?

Tuesday: Which novel by L. M. Montgomery, her most popular, is widely acknowledged as a children’s classic?

If people did not sometimes do silly things, nothing intelligent would ever get done.

Ludwig Wittgenstein
