The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 24, 2023

Diplomatic pressure to send Leopard tanks to Ukraine continued building on Germany, their maker. Poland said it would apply for permission to send its own stock. Meanwhile, Russia ordered Estonia’s ambassador, Margus Laidre, to leave the country within a fortnight. The foreign ministry pinned the downgrade in relations on an “unfriendly step to radically reduce the size” of its own outpost in Tallinn.

Spotify, the world’s biggest audio streamer, will cut 6% of its global workforce, or 600 jobs, as the industry faces reduced advertising revenue amid a harsh economic downturn. It is the latest technology company to restructure after a pandemic-era hiring spree. More than 46,000 American tech workers have been shown the door so far this year, according to Crunchbase, a data provider.

Four members of America’s far-right Oath Keepers group were convicted of seditious conspiracy for participating in the Capitol riot on January 6th 2021. It is a rare charge, carrying a maximum prison sentence of 20 years. Just 14 of the almost 1,000 people criminally prosecuted for storming the Capitol have been charged with seditious conspiracy.

Burkina Faso terminated a security pact with France that has seen 400 French troops stationed in the west African country to fight jihadists in the Sahel. The government—which seized power in a coup in September and has since reportedly cultivated ties with the Wagner Group, a Russian mercenary outfit—gave France’s soldiers a month to pack up. French soldiers left neighbouring Mali last year.

Pakistan suffered a nationwide blackout, leaving nearly 220m people without electricity for the second time in three months. Like much of the country’s infrastructure, the electricity grid needs an expensive upgrade. Pakistan’s finances are already under pressure as the price of imported oil and gas, which the country relies on to generate most of its electricity, surged after Russia invaded Ukraine.

The death toll in Sunday’s mass shooting in Monterey Park, in Los Angeles, rose to 11 after an injured victim died in hospital. Police have not yet disclosed a motive for the attack. The 72-year-old suspect, Huu Can Tran, died after shooting himself in a van. Separately, on Monday, two students were killed in a shooting at an education nonprofit in Des Moines, Iowa.

Argentina and Brazil said they would begin preparatory work to develop a common South American currency. In a jointly written article, leaders of both countries said the currency—perhaps called the “sur”—would reduce costs and external vulnerability. According to the Financial Times, the proposal will be discussed at a summit in Argentina this week. It would be the world’s second-biggest currency bloc.

Fact of the day: 467,000, the number of working-days British employers lost to strikes in November, the highest in over a decade. Read the full story.

Germany’s agony about tanks

PHOTO: DPA
The next stop on Germany’s Via Dolorosa to arming Ukraine with tanks will be a meeting in Berlin on Tuesday between the new defence minister, Boris Pistorius, and the NATO secretary-general, Jens Stoltenberg. Germany has refused thus far to send its Leopard tanks, deeming them “offensive weapons” that could lead to escalation with Russia; it also has not allowed other countries to donate their German-made Leopards.

Flagellated by allies at home and abroad, the government of Olaf Scholz, Germany's chancellor, has started moving. Last week his officials said sending Leopards would depend on America supplying Abrams tanks. Then Mr Pistorius said other countries could start training Ukrainian crews on the Leopards pending deliberations in Germany. Now Annalena Baerbock, the foreign minister, says allies such as Poland could potentially send Leopards. In the end, surely, Mr Scholz will release some tanks—but not before wasting every opportunity for Germany to lead Europe.

European v American inflation

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Predicting inflation is tricky. Many failed to foresee its heights last year, and just as many are surprised by its decline in recent months. The fall has largely been driven by energy prices coming down. On Tuesday new composite PMI numbers will be published for both America and Europe. The business survey, which covers manufacturing and services, will provide some insights into the other factors driving inflation pressures on both sides of the Atlantic.

Europe was harder hit by supply disruptions in the wake of the covid pandemic, but did not see the same kind of spending boom, financed by government stimulus cheques, as in America. But salaries increased quickly in America’s flexible and tight labour market. In Europe, where wages are often decided in collective-bargaining agreements, pay has been increasing more slowly. Europe’s inflation race has longer to run.

Microsoft and the tech downturn

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The fortunes of the world’s biggest enterprise-software firm may offer clues to the state of the tech industry overall. Since November 2021 Microsoft’s shares have fallen by 27%. That is two percentage points fewer than the tech-heavy Nasdaq index, probably because Microsoft’s customers are disproportionately businesses⁠—which have tended to cut back less than consumers have.

Still, Microsoft’s quarterly results on Tuesday may make for grim reading. Last week the firm said it planned to lay off 10,000 people—about 5% of its global workforce. Analysts expect that year-on-year revenue growth will slow to around 2% in the last quarter of 2022, down from 11% in the previous one. A yet-bigger worry is the slowing of Microsoft’s cloud business, which accounts for two-fifths of sales. The relatively new cloud-computing industry has never been through a sustained downturn, and so it is unclear how it might perform. Microsoft’s results may provide a hint.


A Trump probe in Georgia heats up

PHOTO: AP
In Donald Trump’s knot of legal challenges, one important thread is an inquiry into his attempt to overturn the 2020 presidential election in Georgia. A county-level prosecutor launched an investigation a month after Mr Trump phoned a state official and asked him to “find” enough votes for him to win. (The former president defended the phone call as “perfect”.) A special grand jury has compelled unco-operative witnesses to testify, including Rudy Giuliani (Mr Trump’s former lawyer) and Lindsey Graham (a Republican senator).

The investigation wrapped up in January. On Tuesday a judge will hear arguments over whether the special grand jury’s report should be made public. It could include recommendations for criminal charges, such as solicitations of election fraud—though any indictments would come from a separate grand jury. “The allegations are very serious”, said the prosecutor. But as long as the report remains sealed, it will be hard to know the real risks Mr Trump is facing.

The many woes of El Salvador

PHOTO: AFP
El Salvador’s creditors are expecting a payback when $604m of bonds mature on Tuesday. Concerns that the country might default were alleviated last year when the government secured a $450m loan from the Central American Bank for Economic Integration and executed two bond buybacks. But investors’ confidence in El Salvador remains low. The public debt-to-GDP ratio stands at over 80%. In September Fitch, a ratings agency, downgraded the country’s debt yet again.

The uncertainty is thanks almost entirely to Nayib Bukele, the unconventional president. After making El Salvador the first country in the world in which bitcoin is legal tender, in September 2021, Mr Bukele started to invest public money in the cryptocurrency. But the government’s portfolio has lost almost half its value since then, a loss worth some $52m. Some of his other policies are expensive, too. A crackdown on gangs has swelled the prison population. And the cost is not just financial: many innocent people have been rounded up.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: What name for a gentle breeze derives from that of a Greek god?

Monday: The Blue Grotto is a feature of which resort island in the bay of Naples?

A crown is merely a hat that lets the rain in.

Frederick the Great
