The world in brief
April 3, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Sanna Marin, Finland’s prime minister, conceded defeat in tight parliamentary elections. Her centre-left Social Democratic party came third, with 19.9% of the vote. The centre-right National Coalition won 20.7%, followed by the right-wing, populist Finns party, which took 20.1%. Ms Marin has fiercely backed Ukraine and steered Finland’s accession to NATO. In 2019, aged 34, she became the world’s youngest prime minister.

An explosion at a cafe in St Petersburg killed a Russian military blogger, the country’s interior ministry said. The blogger, who went by the name Vladlen Tatarsky, was an outspoken supporter of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and had posted videos filmed at the Kremlin. It is unclear who was behind the blast; at least 25 others were injured.

Switzerland’s federal prosecutor will investigate breaches of law related to the takeover of Credit Suisse by its rival, UBS. Swiss politicians are also expected to open a separate commission of enquiry into the merger, which was backed by the government, regulators and the central bank. Separately SonntagsZeitung, a Swiss newspaper, reported that UBS plans to axe around 30% of its workforce.

Members of the OPEC+ group of oil-exporting countries said they would cut output by more than 1m barrels a day. Saudi Arabia, which is leading the initiative, will account for half of the reduction. It is rare for the group to make such an announcement outside of its usual scheduled meetings. Oil prices have fallen in recent weeks following fears of a global economic slowdown.

Tesla’s car deliveries in the first quarter rose by 36% from a year ago, to 422,875, though they still missed forecasts. Elon Musk, the carmaker’s boss, had targeted growth of 52%. Price cuts introduced in January help explain the year-over-year increase. Mr Musk has set a goal of 2m deliveries in 2023, up from 1.3m last year.

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, marked the anniversary of Russia’s withdrawal from Bucha, a suburb of Kyiv where Russian soldiers killed hundreds of civilians, by praising his country’s resistance. He said that the people of Ukraine had “stopped the biggest force against humanity of our time.” He previously commented that he hopes the town will become a “symbol of justice” regarding Russian war crimes.

America’s secretary of state, Antony Blinken, telephoned Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, to express “grave concern” over the detention of Evan Gershkovich, an American journalist with the Wall Street Journal who was arrested in Russia on Wednesday on espionage charges. Earlier the newspaper described Mr Gershkovich’s arrest as a “vicious affront to a free press”.

Fact of the day: $60bn, the value of Mexico’s remittances, the largest in the world. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Rahul Gandhi unites India’s opposition
On Monday Rahul Gandhi, the leader of India’s opposition party, Congress, will appeal against a conviction sentencing him to two years in prison for defamation. A district court in Gujarat, the home state of Narendra Modi, the country’s prime minister, handed down the decision. It allowed Mr Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party to suspend Mr Gandhi from parliament.

Mr Gandhi had been irking BJP leaders. His “unite India march” across the country in January appeared to win him some support. The BJP hopes that a long-winded legal process will derail his momentum ahead of general elections in 2024.

The opposition, however, hopes it will prove a rallying point. In a rare display of unity, 14 opposition parties joined forces to petition the Supreme Court and accuse the BJP of using federal agencies to target them. Still, even unity may not be enough to unseat the government. At the previous general elections, the opposition parties’ 160 seats would still have been dwarfed by the BJP’s 303.


PHOTO: AFP
Turkey and Syria try to make up
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, long opposed the regime of his Syrian counterpart, Bashar al-Assad. But the consequences of the 12-year Syrian civil war have forced the two to seek a rapprochement. They have their own reasons: Mr Assad wants Turkey to end what he calls its “illegal occupation” in northern Syria; Mr Erdogan wants at least some of the 3.6m Syrian refugees in his country to return home. In December, the countries’ defence ministers met in Russia, in their highest-level encounter since the start of the civil war.

The hope is that talks between the two countries’ deputy foreign ministers, expected on Monday, will pave the way for higher-level negotiations. But Turkey is unlikely to leave northern Syria. It says that the Kurdish militia in the region is a terrorist group, and Mr Assad’s diminished forces would struggle to rein it in. Despite setbacks, Russia will continue to encourage talks. As America retreats from the region, it would relish the chance to fill the diplomatic void left by the West.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
What’s next for Indonesia’s economy?
When Indonesia announces its inflation figures for March on Monday, economists expect another slight drop in the annual rate of price growth, to 5.2%, down from a peak of just below 6% in September last year.

The dip in inflation is not the only thing going well. In late March Indonesia received a glowing report from the IMF, which noted that the country’s budget-deficit reduction targets had been achieved a year early, and that pro-business reforms to the labour market, such as making it easier to outsource workers, should raise long-term growth.

But the biggest upside for Indonesia may be found underground. Indonesia has the world’s joint-largest reserves of nickel, a metal which is needed for making batteries for electric vehicles. Last week, Ford, an American carmaker, announced a $4.5bn nickel-smelting investment with two mining firms operating in Indonesia, Vale Indonesia and Zhejiang Huayou Cobalt. Indonesia has been a relatively anonymous economy—perhaps not for much longer.



PHOTO: AVALON
Disney’s boss faces its shareholders
Bob Iger has been back in charge of Disney for just over four months. But it may feel longer. First he was dragged into a spat with Nelson Peltz, an activist investor who accused Disney of over-spending. Mr Iger saw him off, but only after promising a $5.5bn economy drive, eliminating 7,000 jobs.

At the company’s annual meeting on Monday Mr Iger can tell shareholders their stock has risen by 12.5% this year. But they will have new questions. Some want to know Disney’s plans for Hulu, a streaming platform it owns with Comcast: should Disney buy Comcast out, or sell up? Others wonder why Disney shut down its short-lived metaverse division, which aimed to connect “the physical and digital worlds”, last week. Politics is on the agenda, too, as Florida’s Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, squabbles with what he calls the “woke” entertainment giant over the running of its Disney World resort in Orlando. Mr Iger, who had a blockbuster first run as chief executive until 2020, is having a harder sequel.


PHOTO: COURTESY OF DISNEY+
The women of the ‘Ndrangheta mafia
A television mini-series with an original take on Italian organised crime will begin streaming this week. “The Good Mothers”, which airs on Hulu in America and Disney+ elsewhere, is a British-Italian venture adapted from a book by a British author, Alex Perry.

The story focuses on women tied to the least-known of Italy’s three leading mafias, the ‘Ndrangheta. Originating in Calabria, the toe of the Italian boot, the ‘Ndrangheta has grown immensely rich since the 1990s on the proceeds of cocaine trafficking.

As homemakers, child-rearers and unpaid runners of criminal errands, the wives, mothers and daughters of the ‘Ndrangheta men are caught up in an oppressively patriarchal system. Some accept their lot. Few attempt to defy or escape a crime syndicate built overwhelmingly on family affiliations. “The Good Mothers”, which is based on real events starting in 2009, tells the story of four women who did. For rebelling against the ‘Ndrangheta, two paid a terrible price.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Monday: Which famous landmark, in the centre of Rome, was also known as the Flavian Amphitheatre?

Champagne, if you are seeking the truth, is better than a lie detector.

Graham Greene
