The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (04:27 GMT+1 / 11:27 Hong Kong)

After exchanging a fist-bump with Muhammad bin Salman, Saudi Arabia’s crown prince, in Jeddah, America’s president, Joe Biden, says he confronted him about Jamal Khashoggi, a journalist whose state-sponsored murder in 2018 once prompted Mr Biden to threaten to make the kingdom a “pariah”. He said the crown prince denied involvement. He also said he expects to see steps from Saudi Arabia in the coming weeks to increase energy supplies.

Mr Biden vowed to use executive action to cut greenhouse-gas emissions after climate-change legislation stalled in America’s Senate. Joe Manchin, a Democratic senator who is a frequent obstacle to the administration’s plans said on Thursday that he opposed the inclusion of clean-energy incentives in a social-spending bill. Mr Biden urged the Senate to pass the bill, even without the climate bits, to reform prescription-drugs pricing.

Mr Biden vowed to use executive action to cut greenhouse-gas emissions after climate-change legislation stalled in America’s Senate. Joe Manchin, a Democratic senator for West Virginia and frequent obstacle to the Biden administration, said on Thursday that he would not support the inclusion of clean-energy incentives in a social-spending bill. Mr Biden urged the Senate to pass the bill, even without the climate bits, to reform prescription-drugs pricing.

Officials across Europe issued health warnings as temperatures are expected to soar over the next few days, surpassing 40℃ in several places. Britain issued its first-ever “extreme heat” warning. Thousands of people have already been evacuated from homes to escape wildfires in France, Portugal and Spain.

The World Health Organisation reported the “largest sustained decline” in the administering of childhood vaccines for 30 years. According to official data, the proportion of youngsters receiving three doses of DTP3, which vaccinates against diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis, fell by five percentage points between 2019 and 2021. The WHO blamed disruption caused by the covid-19 pandemic for some of the decline.

An autopsy revealed that Jayland Walker, a black man killed by police in Ohio last month, was struck by gunfire at least 46 times. Mr Walker had fled police when a reportedly routine traffic stop went wrong. Hundreds of people mourned at his funeral this week in Akron, where regular protests are ongoing despite an indefinite curfew.

Jim Thorpe, a Native American of the Sac and Fox nation, was named the sole gold medallist of the decathlon and pentathlon for the Olympic games—in 1912. Indian Country Today reported that the International Olympic Committee restored the full honours that it stripped from Thorpe in 1913 on the grounds that a brief stint as a paid baseball player disqualified him from amateur competition.

Word of the Week: post-quantum cryptography, new encryption mathematics that outpaces the capabilities even of quantum computers. Read the full article.

India’s banks get out of a funk

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
HDFC Bank, India’s biggest private lender, reports its results for the quarter ending in June on Saturday, opening the country’s banking-sector earnings season. HDFC is expected to post profits of $1.2bn, an increase of 26% over the same period last year. The bank hopes that profits will double over the next five years as it reaps the benefits of acquiring a housing-finance unit in April. In the rest of the sector, net profits of the 12 biggest banks are forecast to have grown by 47% year-on-year.

Such bullishness suggests that India’s banks are getting their act together after years of struggling with loans to businesses not being repaid. India’s central bank, which has been clamping down on lax lenders, estimates that bad loans are now 5.9% of the total, a six-year low. And India’s government is reportedly considering culling the number of state-owned banks—which tend to perform especially badly—from 12 to about four.

Europe’s herd of unicorns

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Tech stocks keep tanking, and yet unicorns are born every day. Surprisingly, it is Europe in particular that keeps breeding private companies worth more than $1bn (the definition of a “unicorn”), bucking the downward trend in the industry. In the first six months of the year, Europe added 35 new unicorns, up from 30 in the same period in 2021 and 29 in the second half of that year, according to the latest update of a global “unicorn tracker” maintained by PitchBook, a data provider.

By comparison, unicorn creation in America and Canada was down from its peak; North America tallied 197 in the second half of 2021 and then 146 in the first half of this year. If the current downturn in tech continues, the herd of European unicorns is certain to start growing more slowly—or to shrink. But the data suggest that Europe’s startup ecosystem is now on a more independent path from its bigger American counterpart. Call it the transatlantic tech decoupling.

Bacteria-produced jet fuel

PHOTO: PABLO MORALES-CRUZ
Aviation requires fuel that is energy-dense—powerful, but also light. Without a sufficiently powerful and affordable synthetic alternative, flying will continue to rely on fossil fuels. But researchers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, in California, may have a solution.

In a new paper published in Joule, a journal, the researchers describe how to tweak the enzymes in bacteria to create an artificial metabolic pathway that starts with sugar and ends with polycyclopropanated (POP) fuels. The researchers used the bacteria’s natural metabolism to create cyclopropane rings, one of the most energy-rich structures found in hydrocarbons. Many of the POP fuels had energy densities greater than 40 megajoules per litre, which is more potent than most widely used aviation fuels.

But to become commercially viable this biofuel must be scaled up in a cost-effective manner. Shifting subsidies from fossil fuels to green ones would be one way to get the product off the ground.

The rather unpersuasive “Persuasion”

PHOTO: NICK WALL/NETFLIX
Updating Jane Austen can be a recipe for cinematic magic. “Clueless”, which in 1995 shifted “Emma” to a Beverly Hills high school, is the wittiest Austen adaptation of all. “Persuasion”, released on Netflix on July 15th, is less persuasive.

The film is set in the early 1800s, and it plods around the usual picturesque locations: Bath, Lyme Regis, various stately homes. But the director, Carrie Cracknell, and the screenwriters, Alice Victoria Winslow and Ron Bass, have modernised Austen’s novel in other ways, perhaps inspired by “Bridgerton”, Netflix’s hit Regency costume drama, or British comedies such as “Bridget Jones’s Diary” and “Fleabag”. The multicultural cast of “Persuasion” is prone to anachronistic dialogue such as “self-care” or “out of his league”. Anne Elliot (Dakota Johnson) swigs wine from a bottle, sobs in the bath and addresses waspish remarks to the camera. But her conspiratorial comments and sly winks make her obnoxiously smug. Her beloved old flame, the tongue-tied Captain Wentworth (Cosmo Jarvis), might have been better off without her.

Weekend profile: Penny Mordaunt, Britain’s next prime minister?

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Penny Mordaunt has emerged as the bookies’ favourite to succeed Boris Johnson as leader of the Conservative Party, and thus as Britain’s prime minister. Last week she finished second in the first two ballots of Conservative MPs, who next week will whittle down the five remaining candidates to a final pair. The party’s 100,000-or-so members will then have the final say, with the winner to be announced in early September. If Ms Mordaunt makes it that far, she stands a good chance of triumphing. Separate surveys conducted by ConservativeHome, a grassroots website, and YouGov, a pollster, found that she is the favourite among party members. Yet Ms Mordaunt is unknown outside Westminster. What do the Tories see in her?

Ms Mordaunt was born in 1973. Her mother died when she was 15, and her father, a former paratrooper, fell ill the following year, leaving her to care for her younger brother until her father remarried. She worked as a magician’s assistant to help fund her philosophy studies at the University of Reading. When she joined the leadership race, Ms Mordaunt said her “love and pride” of Britain was kindled as a nine-year-old in Portsmouth, as she watched the navy set sail for war in the Falklands. Her naval interest seems preordained: she was named after HMS Penelope, a cruiser. She serves as a navy reservist, and was elected as the Conservative MP for Portsmouth North in 2010.

Ms Mordaunt’s supporters say her rise reflects the party’s appetite for change after the scandal and decadence of Mr Johnson’s tenure. They describe her as hard-working and dutiful, provincial rather than metropolitan. She supported Brexit, but is not fervent about the divorce. In “Greater: Britain After the Storm”, a book she co-authored last year, she offers an affectionate portrait of modern Britain as a good-humoured land of the NHS, pubs and the Human Rights Act. Her policies tend to focus on local communities rather than grand national ideas. One of her ideas is for MPs to be given pots of money to distribute to good causes in their constituencies. She would like to see a bigger role for charities, and for the volunteers who rallied during covid-19 to be put to work permanently.

The video that announced her candidacy was subject to much mockery in Westminster. It featured rolling shots of Britain, set to “I Vow to Thee My Country”, a patriotic ditty. Party members were not so sniffy. Ms Mordaunt’s ideological ambiguity has made her an attractive default candidate for MPs who dislike Rishi Sunak, the former chancellor and current frontrunner, and Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, her main rival for that second place. Yet even her supporters admit she is untested, and that the success of her notional premiership would depend on whether she would be prepared to appoint strong rivals to big posts, or rely on yes-men—as Mr Johnson did.

Follow the Conservative Party leadership contest with our interactive tracker

The winner’s of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Unmesh Sharma, Mumbai, India
North America: Robert V. Johnson, Hinsdale, United States
Central and South America: José Miguel Ried, Santiago, Chile
Europe: Fred Chambers, London, United Kingdom
Africa: Madeleine Wackernagel, Naro Moru, Kenya
Oceania: Deborah Campbell, Clovelly, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Johnny Ray, Graham Chapman, William Booth, Oswald the lucky rabbit and Cassius Clay. They all share names with assassins: James Earl Ray (Martin Luther King), Mark Chapman (John Lennon), John Wilkes Booth (Abraham Lincoln), Lee Harvey Oswald (JFK) and Cassius (Julius Caesar).

The weekend crossword

Cryptic clues
1 down Muddled, non-U focus in papers for religious leader (4,7)
1 across Some cram an apple upside down in their hat (6)
2 across Leading rough-hide in name only? (5)
3 across Princess is not indiscreet, but messy: don’t tell! (6)

Factual clues
1 down A man not in the habit of taking advice from newspapers (4,7)
1 across Last year 130,000 people trekked through its trackless jungle (6)

2 across It produces material for a powder that sells for $70,000 a kilo (5)
3 across One is hard to preserve in a quantum age (6)

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent in Friday's edition.

Somebody once said we never know what is enough until we know what’s more than enough.

Billie Holiday
