The world in brief
April 17, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Regional diplomatic moves are under way to stop the fighting that broke out on Saturday in Sudan. The Peace and Security Council of the African Union began meeting in an emergency session, as did the Arab League, at the request of Egypt and Saudi Arabia. At least 59 civilians have died in Khartoum, the capital, as fighting between Sudan’s ruling military junta and the Rapid Support Forces, a militia, closes out its second day. A three-hour humanitarian pause on Sunday afternoon, agreed to by both factions, was widely ignored. Last week the two paramilitary forces failed to agree on a transition to a civilian government.

The EU’s foreign policy chief warned that the bloc’s relations with China would depend on China’s future behaviour, particularly over Taiwan. Josep Borrell’s remarks, just before a G7 meeting, are part of a broader EU campaign to counteract comments by Emmanuel Macron. After a recent visit to China, the French president was widely criticised for saying that Europe should not get “caught up in crises that are not ours”.

Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the leader of Poland’s ruling Law and Justice party, said his country will ban imports of Ukrainian grain and other foods to protect Polish farmers. Hours later, Hungary announced a similar measure. Since the war, logistical challenges have meant Ukraine has exported a glut of cheap grain to nearby countries. Poland’s parliament recently approved a €129m ($143m) package to compensate farmers. On Sunday Bulgaria's agriculture ministry said it was also mulling a ban.

Environment ministers from the G7, a club of rich countries, agreed to ambitious new targets for solar power and offshore wind capacity at a meeting in Japan. But they did not endorse a target to phase out coal by 2030, as some members had hoped, instead agreeing “to achieve net zero in energy systems by 2050 at the latest”.

Kishida Fumio, Japan’s prime minister, promised to “maximise” security at next month’s G7 summit meeting. On Saturday Mr Kishida was evacuated from a meeting after a man threw a smoke bomb at him. The assailant reportedly also had a knife. Mr Kishida called that incident, which came less than a year after the assassination of Abe Shinzo, a former prime minister, “unforgivable”.

A former Indian MP and his brother were shot dead live on TV. Atiq Ahmed was in police custody at the time, having been convicted of kidnapping in March, the latest in a string of convictions for murder, extortion and kidnapping. He was being taken for a medical when the attack happened. His three assailants had been posing as journalists, and were quickly apprehended.

Elon Musk plans to launch an artificial-intelligence start-up, according to the Financial Times. He is said to be recruiting engineers and seeking investments. On March 9th Mr Musk incorporated the name X.AI and is also believed to have bought thousands of high-powered processors from Nvidia, of the type required to build a language model. Last month he called for a pause on AI development because of safety concerns.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Is Australia coming off China’s naughty step?
Mark McGowan, the leader of the state of Western Australia’s centre-left government, goes to China on Monday on a trip that aims to “reconnect” the two sides. China cut off bilateral ministerial contact and clobbered Australia with trade bans after the previous coalition government called for an inquiry into the origins of covid-19, in 2020. Under Australia’s new Labor government, the two countries are at least back on speaking terms.

Though Australia remains worried about China’s military ambitions, its politicians have become less confrontational. In return, China has allowed ministerial meetings to resume and seems to be relenting on its trade bans. It has quietly lifted remaining restrictions on Australian coal, and promised to review barley tariffs after Australia suspended a case against it this week at the World Trade Organisation. An end to those trade restrictions would be a big victory down under, especially as Australia has made no concessions on defence, instead pursuing a deal with America and Britain to secure nuclear submarines.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A Kremlin critic on trial
In his final remarks in a court in Moscow on April 10th, Vladimir Kara-Murza, a political dissident, compared his prosecution to the Stalinist purges of the 1930s. A prominent critic of the Kremlin and its invasion of Ukraine, he stands accused of treason and deliberately spreading falsehoods about the Russian army. Prosecutors want a 25-year jail sentence. On Monday the court will issue its verdict.

The closed-door trial aimed to quash civic activism. Shortly after Russia launched an assault against its neighbour in 2022, the Kremlin enacted harsh censorship laws, aimed at any criticism of the war. More than 260 publications had been closed by December, and Twitter, Facebook and Instagram have been walled off. The inconvenient Mr Kara-Murza says he has already survived two poisoning attempts, in 2015 and 2017, for previous transgressions. Nonetheless, even after a year in detention, his show-trial has left him as defiant as ever. As he told the court: “Not only do I not repent any of this, I am proud of it.”


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Italian inflation
Economists will be waiting to see if figures published on Monday in Italy confirm a provisional finding that prices rose more slowly than expected last month, bearing out an optimistic trend across several EU countries. The preliminary estimate for headline inflation was 7.7%, down from 9.1% in February and well below market estimates averaging 8.2%. It hit its recent peak of 11.8% last October.

So far, so good. But annual core inflation, which excludes volatile food and fuel prices, has been provisionally assessed at 6.4%, and is still rising. Similarly, the official statistical agency’s “shopping trolley index” shows that frequently bought goods including food and household items were estimated to cost almost 13% more in March than a year previously. Maurizio Landini, who heads Italy’s biggest trade-union federation, complains that while wages and salaries have stagnated, company profits are rising. He has called for demonstrations in several Italian cities next month.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Britain’s fintech bigwigs assemble
The great and the good of Britain’s once-booming fintech industry meet at the Guildhall in London on Monday for the annual Innovate Finance summit. More than a few of them will arrive bearing scars. Once flush with cash from more than a decade of cheap money, last year rising interest rates spooked their investors and prompted a sharp tightening of the purse strings. Valuations slumped, new funding collapsed and thousands of employees were laid off.

Yet some will come with a spring in their step. “Neobanks”, digital versions of the high-street kind, are at last reaching critical mass. Two, Starling Bank and Revolut, made profits for the first time in 2022—far from a given for fintech firms. A third, Monzo, expects to do the same in 2023. Their years as the hottest ticket in startup investing may be over. But with bottom lines at last turning from red to black, their bosses may not mind much.


PHOTO: RACHEL MANSELL / DOUBLEDAY
Peril at sea, in print and on film
A new book by David Grann chronicles a shipwreck and the conflicting accounts of its warring survivors. “The Wager”, published this week, takes its name from a British frigate that foundered off the coast of Patagonia in 1741. As the crew sheltered on a nearby island, the stuffy captain tried to maintain his command. Yet many sailors instead followed a crew member who was in charge of the ship’s cannon. Fearing court-martial, the captain’s rival kept a journal casting himself in a favourable light. Another shipwrecked journal-keeper—future grandfather to the poet Lord Byron—wrote of mutiny, murder and a desperate struggle to survive.

“The Wager” is a thrilling read, likely to become another bestseller for Mr Grann. It also looks to be headed for the screen. Apple has bought the film rights, with Martin Scorsese directing and Leonardo DiCaprio starring in the adaptation. The Hollywood duo’s “Killers of the Flower Moon”, based on another of Mr Grann’s non-fiction page-turners, debuts at Cannes in May. Awards, ahoy.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Victoria is the capital of which Canadian province?

Those who would give up essential liberty to obtain a little temporary safety deserve neither liberty nor safety.

Benjamin Franklin
