The world in brief
May 9, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Russia launched a wave of strikes on several Ukrainian cities, including Kyiv, the capital. The attacks came as the Kremlin prepares to celebrate Victory Day on Tuesday, the holiday marking Russia’s victory over Nazi Germany in the second world war. A senior Ukrainian official said Russia had stepped up its assault of Bakhmut as it seeks to capture the besieged eastern town by Tuesday. The Wagner Group, a Russian mercenary outfit, appeared to abandon its threat to withdraw from Bakhmut after it had been promised more ammunition from the Kremlin.

America’s treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, is personally calling CEOs to warn them of the potential consequences of failing to raise the debt ceiling, Reuters reported. Republicans are demanding massive federal spending cuts in exchange for lifting the government’s borrowing limit. President Joe Biden wants it raised with no conditions. If negotiations deadlock, America could default on its debt. Ms Yellen has warned that the ceiling could be breached by June 1st.

China said its security services had raided the offices of Capvision, an international consultancy, in Shanghai, Beijing, Suzhou and Shenzhen. Chinese authorities have recently increased scrutiny of advisory firms, arresting employees of Mintz Group, an American due-diligence firm, and removing materials from Bain, an American consultancy. In April China updated its counter-espionage law, broadening its powers to examine documents and data on national-security grounds.

Uzbekistan’s president, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, called a snap election, citing the need for a fresh mandate. Last week the country voted to pass a constitutional referendum that expands legal and social protections—but also extends Mr Mirziyoyev’s sanctioned time in office. He was due to step down at the end of his second term in 2026. The referendum reset the clock, meaning he could stay in office until 2037.

Wildfires in the Canadian province of Alberta forced nearly 30,000 people to evacuate their homes. A third of the roughly 100 active fires are out of control, according to officials, who declared a state of emergency on Saturday. Danielle Smith, Alberta’s premier, called the early and expansive fires “unprecedented”.

NASA launched two new storm trackers from New Zealand on a mission to improve extreme-weather forecasting. The shoebox-sized satellites will fly over tropical cyclones and hurricanes to deliver hour-by-hour updates—a sixfold improvement on current weather-tracking satellites. Two more will set off on a second rocket later this month to create a constellation of four nimble trackers in orbit.

Fact of the day: 90%, the share of the excess heat caused by greenhouse-gas emissions in recent decades that has been soaked up by oceans. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AFP VIA GETTY IMAGES
Russia’s disappointing Victory Day
On Tuesday Russia marks Victory Day with a traditional military parade on Red Square. This year’s pageant will be a nervous affair following a drone attack on the Kremlin, which Russia has presented as an assassination attempt on its president. Parades were cancelled in about a dozen other Russian regions.

The centrepiece event will be scaled down, with the vast majority of active troops and hardware already deployed in Ukraine. It will also be notable for the absence of foreign dignitaries—by Monday only the presidents of Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan had confirmed attendance.

The parade will also go ahead without any recent victories. In Ukraine, Russian troops are close to completing a bloody ten-month battle to take the town of Bakhmut. But Ukrainian troops continue to hold a western sliver of the strategically insignificant spot. Commanding general Oleksandr Syrsky said he had given his troops the task of denying Vladimir Putin a morale-boosting Victory Day victory.


PHOTO: TOM BRENNER - POOL VIA CNP / MEG
Trillion-dollar chicken
President Joe Biden will host Kevin McCarthy, the Republican speaker of the House, on Tuesday to try to head off the possibility of a self-made sovereign default. Mr Biden wants to raise the debt ceiling—a statutory limit on the amount that the federal government may borrow—from the current $31.4trn. Republicans are insisting, in turn, that Mr Biden agree to spending cuts. Janet Yellen, the treasury secretary, warned of a debt-ceiling “catastrophe”. Without a political resolution the government could run out of money by June 1st.

Markets, which have grown accustomed to these regular trillion-dollar standoffs played in Washington, are also showing some jitters. Yields on one-month treasuries are rising. The White House’s economists warn that even a “short default” would knock 0.6% off annual GDP; an extended one would cost 6.1% and plunge the economy into recession.



PHOTO: XINHUA NEWS AGENCY / EYEVINE
South-East Asian leaders in discord
In the past two years Myanmar’s civil war is estimated to have cost 30,000 lives and displaced 2m people. In April more than 170 people were killed in one of the bloodiest airstrikes since the civil war began. But Myanmar’s neighbours are divided on how to end the conflict. This split will cast a shadow over the summit of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), a ten-member talking-shop, which meets from Tuesday in Labuan Bajo, a fishing town on the Indonesian island of Flores.

Some countries’ leaders, including those of Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam, favour more engagement with Myanmar’s ruling generals. Others want to isolate them further. The junta is already banned from ASEAN summits, pending progress on a notional peace plan—a severe sanction from an organisation bent on projecting regional harmony. In February Joko Widodo, Indonesia’s president, said ASEAN will not be “held hostage” by the junta. Indonesia will soon send a general of its own to Myanmar to hold bilateral talks. But a serious effort at ending the country’s misery seems distant.


PHOTO: NINTENDO & UNIVERSAL STUDIOS
Nintendo’s new high score
Nintendo is a games company. But expect plenty of talk on its earnings call on Tuesday about its achievements in a different industry. “The Super Mario Bros. Movie”, a co-production with Universal Pictures about a pair of animated plumbers, made more than $1bn in box-office sales less than a month after its release in the West (and days after coming out in its home market of Japan). That is more than twice the earnings of any other film this year.

Mario’s success has stoked talk of a Nintendo “cinematic universe”, drawing on the company’s other games, such as Zelda and Metroid. Others are following suit: Sega, another Japanese gamemaker, is looking to expand its Sonic the Hedgehog franchise; Sony is adapting PlayStation games like “The Last of Us” and “Gran Turismo” for television and the big screen. Growing nostalgia among ageing gamers and a weariness with existing franchises such as Marvel and Star Wars are working in their favour.


PHOTO: WENDY CONNETT/ROBERT HARDING
A tribute to Norman Foster
You have probably been exposed to at least one of Norman Foster’s designs, whether the Gherkin skyscraper in London, Apple’s futuristic shrine in Cupertino or in some of the world’s largest airports, including Beijing, Hong Kong, London Stansted or Mexico City. Britain’s most prolific architect has shaped skylines and key infrastructure—which he calls “urban glue”—over a career spanning six decades.

An expansive retrospective of Lord Foster’s works opens at the Pompidou Centre in Paris on Wednesday. The exhibition, designed by his firm, takes up nearly 2,200 square metres. It includes drawings, workbooks and models of 130 projects, as well as related works by artists including Fernand Léger, Constantin Brancusi and Ai Weiwei. The collection portrays Lord Foster as an early champion of sustainability in design. Meanwhile, the octogenarian architect still works and remains head of the firm he founded in the 1960s.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which is Canada’s largest province by area?

Monday: Which pianist, who performed a routine called “phonetic punctuation”, was known as the “clown prince of Denmark”?

Life is a long lesson in humility.

J.M. Barrie
