The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 1, 2023
Bola Tinubu of the ruling All Progressives Congress party was declared the winner of Nigeria’s presidential election by its electoral commission. Mr Tinubu won 36% of the vote. His opponents have rejected the results, calling for a fresh poll to be held. The failings of a new electronic-voting system, which has been slow to release tallies, has damaged faith in the fairness of the competition.

Conservative justices on America’s Supreme Court appeared sceptical of the Biden administration’s authority to waive more than $400bn of student-loan debt. Some suggested that power resides only with Congress. Plaintiffs in two lawsuits before the court—which has a 6-3 conservative majority—are challenging Mr Biden’s student-loan-forgiveness plan. A decision is expected by late June.

The boss of Goldman Sachs suggested he might abandon parts of an ill-fated foray into consumer lending amid “significantly narrowed” ambitions. At an investor presentation David Solomon said he was exploring “strategic alternatives” for the consumer-platforms unit, which includes an online service for making home-equity loans and a credit card offered with Apple. The segment’s pre-tax losses have hit at least $3.8bn since 2020.

FTX’s former engineering chief pled guilty to six criminal charges in New York and agreed to testify against his ex-boss, Sam Bankman-Fried. Prosecutors had alleged that, as the crypto exchange neared collapse, Nishad Singh withdrew $6m from it for personal use. Two other former FTX lieutenants are co-operating with prosecutors’ case against Mr Bankman-Fried, which goes to trial in October.

Ukraine’s military said on Tuesday that its forces “repelled more than 60 enemy attacks” over the past day in the besieged city of Bakhmut, in eastern Ukraine, and surrounding villages. Russia has been trying to capture the city for months; fierce fighting has intensified in recent weeks. Bakhmut would be Russia’s first major gain in Ukraine in more than half a year.

Companies receiving money from America’s CHIPS Act will be banned from expanding in “foreign countries of concern” (implicitly, China) for ten years. New rules announced by the Commerce Department will also prevent chipmakers from spending the grants on share buy-backs and require firms to provide plans for affordable child care for employees. The Biden administration’s bill is designed to bolster American semiconductor manufacturing.

Swiss regulators announced that Credit Suisse, the country’s second-largest bank, “seriously breached” supervisory law when doing business with Greensill Capital, a supply-chain financier. Greensill’s collapse in 2021 forced Credit Suisse to freeze $10bn of funds associated with the firm. The Swiss watchdog will now regularly assess Credit Suisse’s largest business relationships for risk of default.

Fact of the day: 6.7%, the decrease in the area of the Earth covered by primary tropical rainforest since 2000. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
More splits at the G20
Harmony among the foreign ministers of the G20 is likely to be elusive when they meet in Delhi on Wednesday and Thursday. India wants to use the meeting in its capital to convey its perspective on international affairs to other members of the club of big economies. But the event will be dominated by divisions over Russia’s war in Ukraine and the escalating conflict between America and China (the foreign ministers of all three big powers are expected to attend).

Last week’s summit of G20 finance ministers in Bengaluru, another Indian city, achieved little as Russia and China refused to sign up to a meeting summary that mentioned a UN resolution condemning the war. Afterwards Western leaders expressed disappointment at the lack of constructive discussion; Russia accused the West of using the forum to impose an anti-Russian “diktat”. India’s long-running border dispute with China is likely to cause additional strife. Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, India’s foreign minister, will be presiding over a frosty room.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Macron in Africa
With Russia and China challenging French influence on the continent, Emmanuel Macron begins a four-country tour of Africa on Wednesday. The French president will begin by co-hosting a “one-forest summit” in Libreville, Gabon, to draw attention to the need to preserve biodiversity in the Congo basin, which contains the world’s second-biggest rainforest after the Amazon. He will then head to Angola, Congo and the Democratic Republic of Congo.

Before leaving Paris Mr Macron called for a “partnership of equals” with Africa, a theme he developed shortly after he was first elected in 2017. But the president’s tour will take place against the backdrop of rising anti-French feeling, fed in many quarters by Russian propaganda. French armed forces, which were engaged in a counter-terrorism operation in Mali, left last year after its junta hired the Kremlin-backed Wagner Group to ensure the country’s security instead. The French army recently left Burkina Faso, too. In Paris, Mr Macron announced that he would further wind down French military bases on the continent, and transform them into training centres for local troops—but he will not close them altogether.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
American conservatives ponder 2024
America’s right gathers in Washington, DC on Wednesday for the annual Conservative Political Action Conference. After a disappointing performance in last year’s midterm elections, Republicans eyeing a presidential run in 2024 will see the four-day affair as an opportunity to rally support. Former president Donald Trump, who entered the race in November, and the secretary of state in his administration, Mike Pompeo, are among the “incredible patriots” slated to speak. So is Nikki Haley, the Trump administration’s ambassador to the UN, who announced her bid in February.

All Republican candidates who are not Mr Trump have a conundrum. They want to defeat him, yet must appeal to his base, still the largest and most enthusiastic in the Republican Party. A crowded field makes Mr Trump’s victory more likely. Florida’s governor Ron DeSantis is currently the strongest likely challenger to Mr Trump, though he is yet to declare his candidacy. Mr DeSantis is absent from CPAC’s lineup, but will doubtless offer a source of conference-hall chatter: he published his “blueprint for America’s revival” on Tuesday.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Australia’s miracle economy is slowing
Australia has an uncanny ability to dodge a downturn. It shrugged off the Asian financial crash of 1997. It held up during the global financial crisis and the resources bust that followed. Even when the pandemic finally brought its 30-year growth run to an end, the downturn was fleeting. Figures released on Wednesday are expected to show that it is muddling through the current global economic slowdown, too. GDP expanded by 2.7% in 2022, and by 0.5% in the final quarter of the year.

But the risks of recession are growing. The IMF expects growth to fall further this year, to 1.6%. After predicting that inflation would peak late last year, Australia’s central bank has become more hawkish. It has raised interest rates nine consecutive times, but the annual inflation rate still sits at 7.4%. Markets predict more increases ahead. The “lucky country” may be running out of economic good fortune.



PHOTO: ABRAHAMIC FAMILY HOUSE
A unique structure opens in the UAE
The Abrahamic Family House, an interfaith centre that comprises a Christian church, a synagogue and a mosque, opens on Wednesday on Saadiyat island in the United Arab Emirates. The country has long seen itself as a unifier of people; it was the first in the Arabian peninsula to host a papal visit (in 2019) and to normalise relations with Israel (in 2020). The Abrahamic centre has been created by Sir David Adjaye, an Anglo-Ghanaian architect who also designed the Ghana National Cathedral in Accra and the National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington, DC.

Its three buildings sit within an enclosed garden that will serve as a meeting space for the UAE’s different religious communities. In a joint statement to mark the opening, Pope Francis and Grand Imam al-Tayeb of al-Azhar, who is seen by many as the highest Sunni Muslim authority, said, maybe a tad optimistically, “We have entered a new phase in the history of religions.”


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Tuesday: Which 19th century British medical reformer was also a statistical pioneer?

Wednesday: Which actress, who appeared in the sitcom Head of the Class, was married to Mike Tyson?

A bureaucracy always tends to become a pedantocracy.

John Stuart Mill
