The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (03:22 GMT+1 / 10:22 Hong Kong)

Russian forces fired at towns around the Zaporizhia nuclear power station in the south-east of Ukraine. The plant was captured by Russian troops in March but is still run by Ukrainian staff, and, according to Russia, is being shelled by Ukrainian forces. The fighting has increased fears of a radioactive leak from the plant. Residents in Zaporizhia are being taught how to treat themselves with iodine in the event of radiation exposure.

Four associations of European judges challenged the European Council’s decision to grant Poland access to €23.9bn ($23.8bn) in grants and €11.5bn in loans. The cash had been blocked because of a dispute over the independence of Polish judges, which the European Commission said was being undermined. The judges said that Poland’s reform plans “fall short of what is required” to protect judicial independence.

The US Navy said two American warships were sailing through the Taiwan Strait, the first to do so since Nancy Pelosi, speaker of the House of Representatives, visited Taiwan this month. The navy said it was demonstrating America’s “commitment to a free and open Indo-Pacific”. China—which claims Taiwan as its own and carried out large military exercises in response to Ms Pelosi’s trip—said it was monitoring the ships and maintaining a high alert.

Liz Truss, the favourite to become leader of the Conservative Party and hence Britain’s prime minister, reportedly ruled out further aid for those struggling with surging energy bills. Rishi Sunak, her rival for the job, said the government “must provide some direct support”. Boris Johnson, the departing leader, insisted that whoever wins on September 5th, “the government will announce another huge package of financial support.”

Lee Jae-myung, who was narrowly defeated in this year’s South Korean presidential election, was elected to lead the main opposition party. Mr Lee won nearly 78% of the vote among members of the Democratic Party. In his victory speech he criticised the administration of Yoon Suk-yeol, the conservative who won the presidential contest in March.

Angola held a funeral for its late dictator, José Eduardo dos Santos, days after an election which was disputed by the opposition. In the general election on August 24th Mr dos Santos’s ruling party won a slim majority. But Adalaberto Costa Júnior, the opposition leader, rejected the results. The state funeral gives the authorities an excuse to clamp down on post-election protests.

Officials in Pakistan said on Sunday that the death toll from floods after heavy monsoon rains that have afflicted the country since mid-June had risen to more than 1,000. In appealing for international help on Friday, the prime minister, Shehbaz Sharif, said that 33m of Pakistan’s 230m people had been affected by the floods.

Fact of the day: 145,000, the number of words in India’s constitution, the longest in the world. Read the full story.

No more dollars at the Moscow Exchange

PHOTO: REUTERS
An international pariah, Russia is trying to reorient its economy away from the West. So from Monday the Moscow Exchange, Russia’s largest financial marketplace, will no longer accept American dollars as collateral for underwriting transactions. This is part of a long strategy of reducing dependence on the American financial system: in the years before the war in Ukraine the central bank shifted its foreign-exchange holdings away from dollars. The country also built up a parallel payments infrastructure that did not rely on Visa and MasterCard.

The question is whether isolation from the West is a good economic strategy. The Russian economy has held up far better under Western sanctions than almost anyone expected. It has sold more oil to India and China, and bought more stuff from Turkey. But over time depriving itself of Western tech and ideas—not to mention money—will start to bite.

Syria’s forgotten war

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
For years the world has treated Syria as a frozen conflict. Iran, Russia, Turkey and a smattering of American forces have carved the country into zones of influence, while leaving Syrians—and the regime of President Bashar al-Assad—to labour under crippling sanctions. On Monday the UN Security Council meets to discuss Syria’s crisis.

External events largely determine the country’s fate. Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, seemingly wants to bury the hatchet with Mr Assad and forcibly repatriate Syrian refugees before he faces an election next year. Russia has relocated some of its fighting strength, which had been propping up Mr Assad, to its war in Ukraine. And America and Iran are again talking about a nuclear deal, despite American and Iran-backed forces exchanging fire in Syria. The UN looks ever more a bystander. But the Security Council can still serve as a forum for regional and global powers to press their interests while claiming to be helping war-ravaged Syrians.

A folly into space

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Monday, or soon after, NASA hopes to move closer to returning people to the Moon’s surface, with the flight of its Space Launch System. The SLS will send a capsule carrying three mannequins wired with radiation sensors, to the Moon’s vicinity. Humans are due there in 2024—and a landing is planned for 2025 .

Unfortunately, the launch is a colossal waste of money. The SLS, which has cost American taxpayers around $23bn in the past decade, will probably soon be outclassed by privately built models. It is a hangover from NASA’s Constellation programme, which was cancelled in 2010 because of ballooning costs. But the contracts for the programme had already been doled out to various aerospace companies. So in what Lori Garver, a former NASA official, calls “the relentless momentum of the status quo”, the SLS programme was created by Congress to ensure that contracts from the defunct Constellation programme kept going. Taxpayers, and space science, are poorer for that self-serving decision.

What to read to understand how countries escape poverty

PHOTO: ALAMY
Three decades ago nearly 2bn people lived in absolute poverty. By 2018 that figure had fallen by more than half. There has perhaps been no greater human achievement. How did this happen? A big part of the answer is found in China, where hundreds of millions have escaped the worst forms of deprivation. But there is no sure-fire path to development. What worked for Singapore may not work for Somalia. Yet, as these four books suggest, some things matter more than others.

“Poor Economics”, by Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo, both Nobel prizewinners in economics, does what much literature on development does not: treats the poor as people, rather than as a faceless collective.

Also try “Development as Freedom”, by Amartya Sen, in which another Nobel economics laureate lays out his theories about what freedom really means. Freedom from poverty is one measure, but so is access to basic services, such as education and health care.

“How China Escaped the Poverty Trap”, by Yuen Yuen Ang, explains how China exploited institutional weaknesses, such as corruption and unstable property rights, to build markets. These flourishing markets helped strengthen institutions which in turn developed markets further, and helped to lift millions of people out of poverty.

Last, to understand what doesn’t work as well as what does, try “The White Man’s Burden”, by William Easterly. The economist argues that the West’s approach, comprising foreign aid and advice, is a costly example of failure. According to Mr Easterly, it accomplished “so much ill” because it imposed top-down plans on countries instead of understanding bureaucratic, cultural and political conditions on the ground.

For reading recommendations on many more topics, visit The Economist reads.

Serena’s swansong at the US Open

PHOTO: AFP
As a child, Serena Williams said her goal in tennis was to win the US Open. That happened quickly enough: in 1999 she won the tournament as a 17-year-old. But then the American tennis star kept on winning. With a power game that changed the sport, she broke records and hoovered up 22 more grand slams, tennis’s most prestigious titles. Only Margaret Court, an Australian, has more, with 24. And even that record would have been broken, claims Ms Williams, were it not for her health issues after the birth of her child in 2017. She hasn’t won a grand slam since.

Ms Williams has no regrets, though. Now she wants to focus on her family and Serena Ventures, her venture-capital firm. This year’s US Open, which starts on Monday, will be her last tournament. The bookies have her as a 50-to-1 longshot. But Ms Williams has overcome longer odds before.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Who was the wife of Jupiter in Roman mythology?

A kiss is a lovely trick designed by nature to stop speech when words become superfluous

Ingrid Bergman
