The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than a minute ago (03:58 GMT+1 / 10:58 Hong Kong)

The S&P 500 index increased 9.1% in July as stockmarkets rebounded Friday, its best monthly performance since November of 2020. The Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nasdaq Composite also posted monthly rises of 6.7% and 12%, respectively. Despite fears of a recession, markets were buoyed by the tech giants’ gains after Apple, Amazon, Microsoft and Alphabet reported earnings this week.

Ukraine and Russia blamed each other for the shelling of a prison which killed 53 Ukrainian prisoners of war. Ukraine said Russia had launched the attack to cover up evidence of Russian war crimes against imprisoned Ukrainians, and that claims to the contrary were part of Moscow’s “information war”. Russia said Ukraine had used American-supplied rockets against the prison, which is located in a Russian-controlled separatist region of Ukraine.

The top diplomats from America and Russia discussed the potential for a prisoner swap and safe passage for Ukrainian grain in their first call since the invasion began. Antony Blinken said he pressed Sergei Lavrov to release Brittney Griner, a women’s basketball star, and Paul Whelan, a former marine. The Kremlin would prefer to negotiate prisoner exchanges using “quiet diplomacy”, according to a statement from Russia’s foreign ministry.

The Securities and Exchange Commission added Alibaba, a Chinese e-commerce giant, to its list of firms that could be jettisoned from American stock exchanges. Alibaba’s share price fell at the news. China has refused to allow American inspectors to review audits of its listed companies. The row has prompted Chinese firms, including Alibaba, to seek primary listings in Hong Kong instead of New York.

Inflation in the euro zone rose to a record high 8.9%, stoked by the economic fallout from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The new numbers may spur the European Central Bank to hike interest rates again; last week the bank raised rates for the first time since 2011. Europe’s biggest economy, Germany, reported stagnant GDP figures for the second quarter of 2022; it is set to be the worst economic performer among G7 nations this year.

Belarus recalled its ambassador to Britain, accusing the British government of “hostile and unfriendly” actions. Belarus’s foreign ministry said Britain had executed policies “systematically aimed at causing maximum damage to Belarusian citizens and legal entities”, such as sanctions on Belarusian companies. Relations have soured after Belarus’s dictatorial ruler, Alexander Lukashenko, cracked down on opposition and cosied up to Russia.

President Joe Biden issued a disaster declaration for the state of Kentucky, where flash floods killed at least 16 people and destroyed hundreds of homes. Andy Beshear, the state’s governor, said the death toll would probably “get a lot higher”. Torrential rains battered towns this week across several states, including Missouri, Kentucky and Tennessee.

Word of the week: champing, the practice of camping in churches.

I think that I shall never see a poem lovely as a tree.

Joyce Kilmer
