The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 6 hours ago (21:00 GMT+1 / 04:00 Hong Kong)

In an extraordinary fiscal intervention, Kwasi Kwarteng, Britain’s chancellor of the exchequer, unveiled a “mini-budget” for boosting growth through large tax cuts and increased government spending. The British pound dropped to a 37-year low in response, as investors fretted over the massive borrowing that will be required to fund his proposals. Britain’s Debt Management Office confirmed that the government will borrow an extra £72bn ($80bn) this year to fund the package. Rachel Reeves, the Labour Party’s shadow chancellor, criticised the mini-budget for rewarding the rich.

UN investigators said that Russia has committed war crimes in Ukraine. The experts, whose inquiry had been commissioned by the UN Human Rights Council in May, said they were “struck by the large number of executions” in the areas they visited. They also observed “consistent accounts of ill-treatment and torture” and documented a wide range of crimes committed against children.

​​Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, said the EU had “tools” to deal with undemocratic governments—a thinly veiled warning to Italy ahead of its election on Sunday. A hard-right alliance led by Giorgia Meloni is expected to win. Matteo Salvini, the head of one of the parties in Ms Meloni's bloc, called the comments “shameful arrogance”.

Armenia and Azerbaijan accused each other of violating a ceasefire that had been agreed last week. On Friday morning Armenia’s defence ministry announced that Azerbaijani armed forces had fired on Armenian combat positions. In response, Azerbaijan’s defence ministry said that Armenia had attacked first. Fighting between the two countries earlier in the month left nearly 200 soldiers dead.

Russia announced some exemptions from its civilian draft, amid attempts by large numbers of men to leave the country and concerns from companies over staffing shortages. Many of those who work in technology, banking and telecommunications will not be sent to the frontline in Ukraine. Meanwhile Russia’s European neighbours—Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland—collectively ruled out expanding their asylum categories to include fleeing Russians.

Hong Kong axed its hotel quarantine requirement for inbound travellers. Arrivals will instead go through three days of “medical surveillance” at home, during which they will be allowed to leave their residences for select destinations (excluding restaurants and bars). Earlier on Friday, Japan also announced the easing of covid-19 border restrictions from next month, seen as a way to revive tourism and bolster the sliding yen.

Silvio Berlusconi, a former Italian prime minister, was widely condemned at home and abroad after saying that Vladimir Putin had been “pushed” into invading Ukraine, and sought only to impose a "government made up of decent people” on the country. Mr Berlusconi, a long-time associate of Mr Putin's, insisted that his views had been “oversimplified”. His Forza Italia party is part of a right-wing coalition expected to win Italy's general election, on Sunday.

Word of the week: Nannaria swiftae, the scientific name for a millipede given to honour Taylor Swift, the American pop star. Read the full story.

Scholz of Arabia

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor, is visiting three Gulf states this weekend in a bid to shore up energy supplies and dampen prices. With imports of oil and gas from Russia cut off, and power-hungry firms and households facing steep winter bills, Europe’s biggest economy is sliding towards a recession.

Mr Scholz will turn on the charm in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, all big energy exporters, arguing that it is in their own long-term interest to calm markets and keep customers happy. Germany is particularly keen to secure liquefied natural gas deliveries from Qatar, which vies with America and Australia as the top exporter of the fuel. But the toughest meeting on Mr Scholz’s first visit to the region as chancellor may be with Muhammad bin Salman, the Saudi crown prince. The kingdom’s record on human rights and its messy entanglement in Yemen’s civil war have not endeared the Saudi leader to German public opinion.

Political protests in Angola

PHOTO: AFP VIA GETTY IMAGES
When supporters of Angola’s main opposition party take to the streets on Saturday they will know that their cause is just—and their chances of success slim. The National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) says last month’s election was rigged by the ruling party—and its former enemy in the country’s civil war—the People’s Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA).

UNITA has a case. Tallies collected by NGOs suggest the result was a near-tie. Yet the electoral commission announced that the MPLA won 51% of the vote. Without a majority, the party’s grip on power would have been at risk. Alas, the courts, the commission and, most importantly, Angola’s security apparatus, are all under its thumb. So UNITA’s protests will probably be defeated, peacefully or otherwise. The only comfort it can take is that, given President João Lourenço’s disappointing record, the opposition will only grow in strength in Africa’s largest oil producer.

“Sidney”, a new look at a Hollywood trailblazer

PHOTO: SUPPLIED BY LMK
The rags-to-riches life story of Sidney Poitier, as recounted in a new documentary about the trailblazing actor, just released, is as compelling a narrative as any in his films. Sir Sidney’s parents were poor Bahamian tomato farmers. As a teenager, he was taught to read by a Jewish waiter in New York. He went on to become one of Hollywood’s first black leading men (starring in hits like “The Defiant Ones” and “Guess Who’s Coming To Dinner”), the first black winner of an Academy Award for acting (for “Lilies of the Field”), and a director of raucous comedies (such as “Stir Crazy”).

Oprah Winfrey, the documentary’s producer, and other friends speak of him with love and respect. But the highlights of “Sidney” are the archive interviews with the actor himself, who died in January at the age of 94. The towering dignity and authority that made him a superstar can be seen in every clip.

Juanes, a Colombian rock star, plays in America

PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
Juanes returns to the American stage in San Diego on Saturday to promote his album, “Origen”. The Colombian singer, a winner of three Grammy awards and 26 Latin Grammys, will also release a new album in the coming months.

His songs unite traditional Colombian rhythms with rock instrumentation, giving him rockstar status in his homeland. Born in 1972 and growing up in 1980s Medellín, a city terrorised by Pablo Escobar’s drug cartel and guerrilla fighters, music provided an emotional escape: “We clung to it as if our lives depended on it,” he recalled. His breakthrough hit was “Fijate Bien”, a song about Colombia’s ubiquitous land mines. In 2008 his “Peace Without Borders” concerts attempted to create cross-border civilian unity amid the diplomatic crisis unfolding between Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela. His career spans a turbulent period of Colombian history—but also a time of change. Last month Colombia’s first ever left-wing president took office.

Weekend profile: William Kentridge, South African artist

PHOTO: NEWS SYNDICATION
Using just a stick of charcoal and crisp sheet of white paper, William Kentridge tries to make sense of a messy world. Over and over, he traces a line, smudges it a little, rubs it out and traces it anew. His mediums are many, his subjects wide ranging: the Russian revolution; the great colonial wars of the 20th century; the inequities of his native South Africa, first under apartheid and then democratic rule. Doubt, migration and the slipperiness of history are recurring themes.

Aged 67, Mr Kentridge is in the flush of his career—and having a moment. This month “Self-Portrait as a Coffee Pot”, a documentary series chronicling his studio practice, had its premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival. In London he is involved in three shows. A retrospective at the Royal Academy of Arts, opening on Saturday, is packed to the gunwales with his drawings, sculptures and sets for theatre and opera. Starting on October 6th the Barbican will stage performances, involving music and dance, by South African artists developed at Mr Kentridge’s incubator in Johannesburg. Also next month Goodman Gallery will screen “Oh to Believe in Another World”, a stop-motion film set to Dmitri Shostakovich’s Tenth Symphony.

Shostakovich composed the symphony around the time of Joseph Stalin’s death; its explosive second movement is said to evoke state terror. Mr Kentridge uses marionettes to explore the composer’s attitudes towards Stalin and the Soviet Union. The film resembles a collage. Like much of Mr Kentridge’s work, it implies that history itself is a process of eliding, distorting and stitching things back together.

For the impatient viewer these works may be noisy and confusing. But it’s worth persisting. “One of the hard things to realise”, says Mr Kentridge, “is the edge of who one is, of what your imagination can produce.”

The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Vyas Prasad, Singapore

North America: Katia Butrimova, Toronto, Canada

Central and South America: Martin Whittle, São Paulo, Brazil

Europe: Arvid Skaugen, Hamburg, Germany

Africa: Ailsa Green, Choma, Zambia

Oceania: Christopher and Annie Jones, Sydney, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of moths, base, Michael Foot, Moses basket and Hard Times. The theme is that these are all words that can be used as prefixes for ball: mothball, baseball, football, basketball and hardball.

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Cryptic clues

1 down Maniac (and liar, etc) ruined part of the world (5,7)

1 across Drink made of sweet, but not frozen, water (6)

2 across Tree very quietly planted in middle of far, hilly field (5)

3 across A religious leader disheartened about language (6)

Factual clues

1 down A source of anti-imperialist and anti-American sentiment (5,7)

1 across Something tricky to track down in Delhi (6)

2 across One of the biggest corporate victors of the past few decades (5)

3 across One of the languages in which Russia is churning out propaganda (6)

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown the winners in next week’s edition.


You don’t write because you want to say something, you write because you have something to say.

F. Scott Fitzgerald
