The world in brief June 6, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 00:48 GMT+1 / 07:48 Hong Kong

The governor of Luhansk said Severodonetsk was now divided “more or less” in half between Ukrainian and Russian troops. It had been reported that 70% of the strategically important eastern city had been captured by Russia, until a Ukrainian counterattack. Meanwhile, explosions were reported in the capital, Kyiv, during the early hours of Sunday morning.

Vladimir Putin said if the West supplied Ukraine with longer-range missiles Russia would strike targets it has so far avoided. Last week Joe Biden said America would supply Ukraine with M142 High Mobility Artillery Rocket Systems after it said they would not be used to target Russia. Mr Putin said the shipments were "nothing new"; longer-range munitions for them would prompt a response.

North Korea carried out probably its biggest single missile test, a day after its southern neighbour and America finished joint military exercises. South Korean authorities reported that the north fired at least eight short-range ballistic missiles into the sea off its east coast, concluding that this was a “test and challenge” for the security posture of the new South Korean government.

The World Health Organisation said that there have been 780 confirmed monkeypox cases over the last three weeks in countries where it is not endemic. It is the first time that the usually mild infection has spread beyond west and central Africa, mainly to Europe and America. The WHO declares that the global risk level from monkeypox is “moderate”.

In Bangladesh, a huge explosion at a storage depot killed at least 49 people and injured hundreds more. The accident happened at Sitakunda, near the city and seaport of Chittagong. Firefighters were also killed in the blast. Some reports suggested that it may have been caused by chemicals stored in transport containers catching fire. The site is one of the country’s biggest transport hubs.

At least 50 people, children among them, were shot dead when a gunman opened fire on the congregation and set off explosive devices in a Catholic church in Nigeria. The attack happened in the town of Owo in the southern state of Odo, hitherto a relatively peaceful part of the country. No group has yet claimed responsibility for the attack.

At least six people were killed and more than 25 injured in mass shootings in Pennsylvania and Tennessee, according to police. Two people were also reportedly shot dead in Saginaw, Michigan; a third was hit by a car while trying to escape. America has had at least 240 mass shootings in 2022, according to the Gun Violence Archive.

Fact of the Day: 65%, about the proportion of crude oil that Hungary imports from Russia. Hungary is the EU county most opposed to an oil embargo on Russia. Read the full article.

European divisions on Ukraine

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The gap among Western countries over the endgame in Ukraine keeps widening. Germany is often chastised for being a Russlandversteher, a “Russia understander”. But that title might best apply to France after its president, Emmanuel Macron, repeated a comment he made last month that “Russia must not be humiliated”. Ukrainian leaders are furious.

What is Mr Macron up to? He appears to be motivated by memories of the 1919 Versailles treaty whose punitive terms, many argue, led to the rise of Nazism and the second world war. If so, such thinking seems premature. War in Ukraine is still raging. The battle for the eastern city of Severodonetsk hangs in the balance.

Mr Macron may be worried about nuclear escalation, particularly if the Russian army is routed. He may also hope to cast himself as a mediator in any future peace talks, which requires maintaining distance from America and a dialogue with Russia.


All at odds in the Americas

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Expectations are low for what could be a particularly fractious Summit of the Americas, a regional gathering starting in Los Angeles on Monday. For starters, the presidents of several countries, including Mexico, Honduras and Bolivia, say they won’t come, in protest over the United States’ decision not to invite authoritarian heads of state in Nicaragua and Venezuela (and maybe Cuba). Guatemala’s president is also skipping the get-together over US sanctions on his government.

Progress is unlikely whatever the guest list. Long gone are the days of bold declarations, such as a charter in 2001 that committed the region’s countries to democracy. The United States has been losing clout in the Americas, while several countries are retreating from democracy and free trade. That is bad news for everyone. As well as perennial issues such as migration, the region needs to respond to problems both exposed and deepened by the pandemic, including wobbly health and education systems, and poverty.

A tight race in Pennsylvania

PHOTO: REUTERS
After a bruising campaign and recount, Mehmet Oz emerged victorious in Pennsylvania’s Republican Senate primary on Friday. After polls closed on May 17th, just 902 votes put Dr Oz, a television star endorsed by Donald Trump, ahead of his opponent, David McCormick, triggering the recount. Mr Trump urged Dr Oz to declare victory prematurely, while Mr McCormick won a court case to include undated ballots. But with his numbers unimproved, Mr McCormick conceded defeat.

Dr Oz must now convince more Republicans of his conservative bona fides while still tacking to the centre. Though he benefits from Americans’ souring opinions of Democrats, Pennsylvania is closely divided. It provides Democrats with one of their few chances to flip a Republican-held seat and preserve their narrow Senate majority. With his working-class demeanour and moderate positioning, the Democratic nominee, state lieutenant-governor John Fetterman, looks formidable. But after suffering a stroke on May 13th, he has yet to return to campaigning.

Decisions ahead for the Supreme Court

PHOTO: AP
On Monday America’s justices release rulings in one or more of the 33 cases that remain to be decided before their summer holiday. An unusual number of high-profile disputes dot the docket. The court will determine the scope of the Environmental Protection Agency’s power to regulate greenhouse-gas emissions in power plants. Cases involving school funding inMaine and a praying football coach in the state of Washington could weaken America’s wall of separation between church and state. A challenge to a gun regulation in New York gives the court a chance to bolster the right to bear arms.

Meanwhile it seems the right to abortion—according to a draft opinion leaked on May 2nd—will be erased 49 years after it gained constitutional protection in Roe v Wade. Tensions are high at the court amid an investigation into the leak and, with its 6-3 conservative tilt, the court faces plummeting support among a public that is roughly split 50-50. The drama is unlikely to ebb before the July 4th holiday.

The Lady’s not for burning

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Margaret Atwood, a Canadian writer, was recently filmed trying to torch a copy of her 1985 novel “The Handmaid’s Tale”. Brandishing a flame-thrower, she took aim, but this “unburnable” edition, printed on foil paper with nickel wire and stainless-steel binding, survived. It is to be auctioned on Tuesday at Sotheby’s, to draw attention to a wave of book bannings in America. “The Handmaid’s Tale”, which depicts a nightmare theocracy, is among the world’s most widely forbidden works.

The auction benefits PEN America, a charity supporting free expression, to combat conservative attacks on books about gender issues, racism and sex education. The American Library Association reports that complainants tried to remove 1,597 titles in 2021, a fourfold increase from the year before. “Let’s hope we don’t reach the stage of wholesale book burnings, as in Fahrenheit 451,” Ms Atwood says, referring to Ray Bradbury’s dystopian novel. Bidding for her own unburnable book currently stands at $100,000.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Which actor, known for playing Dr Who, has recently taken on more villainous roles such as Kilgrave in Jessica Jones and the serial killer, Dennis Nilsen?

The least of things with a meaning is worth more in life than the greatest of things without it.

Carl Jung
