The world in brief
July 8, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The Biden administration confirmed that it would send cluster munitions to Ukraine. Jake Sullivan, America’s top national-security official, said the decision was “difficult”. Because unexploded bomblets from cluster munitions—which release a large amount of smaller bombs—pose long-term risks to civilians, a law bans their export, though the president can override it. America will provide munitions with a low “dud rate”, below 2.35%.

The Dutch government collapsed after the ruling coalition’s four parties failed to agree on asylum policy. The prime minister, Mark Rutte, said on Friday that he would resign after chairing unsuccessful crisis talks. His centre-right VVD party favours limiting the number of refugees’ relatives allowed into the country to 200 per month; two coalition partners oppose the idea. A general election is expected in the autumn.

American jobs growth slowed more than anticipated in June, according to the labour department, suggesting that interest-rate hikes are beginning to take effect. In June the economy added 209,000 new non-farm jobs, compared with forecasts of 225,000 and down from 306,000 in May. The unemployment rate dipped slightly to 3.6%.

Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary-general, said the inaugural meeting of a new NATO-Ukraine council would take place during the alliance’s summit in Vilnius next week. He said that NATO’s leaders would reaffirm that Ukraine will eventually join the organisation. Mr Stoltenberg also expects allies to reiterate support for the territorial integrity of countries vulnerable to Russian interference, such as Georgia.

Switzerland and Austria signed a declaration of intent to join Sky Shield, a European air defence programme set up by Germany in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The initiative, which has 17 members so far, fosters co-operation on training and procurement. The new joiners stressed that the alliance would not compromise their centuries- and decades-long neutrality, respectively.

The Philippines’ military reported an “alarming” rise in Chinese fishing vessels in contested waters in the South China Sea, from 12 in February to 47 in June. The vessels are just south of the oil and gas-rich Reed Bank. A ruling in 2016 by the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague confirmed the area as an exclusive economic zone for the Philippines, which China has ignored.

Deforestation in Brazil’s Amazon dropped by a third in the first half of the year compared with the same period in 2022, according to the government. Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the country’s left-wing president who took office in January, has vowed to end illegal deforestation by 2030. Brazil owns 60% of the world’s largest rainforest.

Word of the week: gusanos, or “worms”. Fidel Castro’s name for people who fled after the Cuban revolution in 1959. Today they send back $2bn-3bn in cash a year to the country, 2-3% of GDP. Read the full story.


PHOTO: IMAGO
Russia wields its social conservatism
In Russia Saturday is Peter and Fevronia Day, or “Day of Family, Love and Fidelity”—a holiday trumpeting traditional family values. The symbolism chimes with President Vladimir Putin’s fierce social conservatism. In December Russia expanded its “homosexual propaganda” law to ban the promotion of “non-traditional sexual relationships” not only to children, but adults too. In June the lower house of Russia’s parliament passed a bill banning gender-reassignment surgery and the changing of a person’s gender on official documents.

Mr Putin uses what he sees as a clash of values to justify his invasion of Ukraine. He paints Western societies as hotbeds of debauchery; for example he has said that teaching children about gender fluidity is “on the verge of a crime against humanity”. The Kremlin, he avers, will protect its people from these sordid influences. In practice, that means embedding militaristic nationalism into everyday life, such as by introducing lessons on “Russian values” at schools. But as Mr Putin’s bloody war drags on, many Russians may realise that they don’t mind Western norms so much after all.


PHOTO: AP
Latvia’s intrepid new president
Diplomats are supposed to be conciliatory, but Baltic ones do not mince words when it comes to their neighbour, Russia. One of the sharpest-tongued is Edgars Rinkevics, Latvia’s foreign minister since 2011. He calls Russia an “evil empire” and accuses it of committing genocide in Ukraine. On Saturday Mr Rinkevics will become Latvia’s president, having been elected by the country’s parliament in May. As the country’s first openly gay head of state, he will stand as a rebuke to Vladimir Putin’s oppressive cultural ideology.

The war in Ukraine has been tough on Latvia, which depended on Russia for gas. In the war’s first year inflation passed 20%. Domestic politics is somewhat paralysed: the prime minister, Krisjanis Karins, who wields more real power than the largely ceremonial president, may reshuffle his cabinet to push through reforms. But Latvians’ geopolitical prestige has grown: they can tell the West they were right about Russia all along.


PHOTO: SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Improving bone transplants
After blood, bone is the most commonly transplanted tissue. But bone grafts are painful, costly and can compensate only for small defects. For larger defects, you need a scaffold—a 3D implant that gives structure to growing bone. But that is tricky: soft scaffolds cannot hold much weight, and in harder ones cells struggle to divide. Now, researchers at the Technical University of Denmark have built a scaffold that balances structure and flexibility.

Like native bone, their scaffold marries a hard framework with a soft matrix where transplanted cells can proliferate. The engineers implanted it, loaded with bone-marrow stem cells, into rats with defects in their skulls. It enhanced bone growth by 84% after eight weeks of healing, far outperforming previous scaffolds. The researchers claim that they can halve the healing time and revolutionise orthopaedics. Helpfully, the scaffold is built from materials already approved by America’s Food and Drug Administration.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A Rugby World Cup preview in Pretoria
The Rugby Championship, a four-team tournament between southern-hemisphere sides, starts on Saturday in Pretoria, South Africa. The championship features three leading contenders to win the Rugby World Cup in France, which begins in two months.

Australia’s head coach, Eddie Jones (pictured), is back after 17 seasons away, having led teams such as England and Japan. He has just five matches to imprint his methods on Australia’s players before the real business—the World Cup. Expect some experimentation. New Zealand, meanwhile, had a woeful 2022 by their standards, losing a match to Argentina in the Rugby Championship and a home Test series to Ireland for the first time. Ian Foster clung on to his job as coach, but will need at least two wins to build confidence for France. Finally, South Africa have an experienced, settled squad and will aim to inflict a psychological blow on New Zealand, a team they might meet in the World Cup quarter-finals.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Barbie
Sporting a black-and-white striped swimsuit, red lips and a sideways gaze, Barbie first tottered off the production line in 1959. She was named after the daughter of the couple who developed her, but her figure was copied from an erotic doll sold to German men. American children were besotted; their mothers fretted that the 11.5-inch, anatomically impossible woman was a bad influence. So Barbie was given a job (as a model) and marketed as a way to teach girls to look neat and stylish. On Sunday, 64 years later—yet not one day older—she will grace the pink carpet for the Hollywood premiere of “Barbie”, her first live-action film.

Barbie’s inventor was Ruth Handler. With her husband she founded Mattel, the toymaker that still owns Barbie. Barbie prototypes were mistakenly given nipples. Deemed too outré, they were delicately filed off. In 1961 Barbie acquired a preppie boyfriend, Ken.

Handler believed that “little girls want to pretend to be bigger girls” and that Barbie would free them from the infantilising world of baby dolls. Never presented as a wife or a mother, Barbie has had 250 careers including astronaut, surgeon and presidential candidate. Still, many feminists have long despaired at her unrealistic shape, materialism and conformity to gender stereotypes. Lamenting that “math class is tough” did a 1992-era talking Barbie few favours. The best-selling Barbie model, also sold in the 1990s, had floor-length hair, irresistible for brushing. Barbie’s biographer, M.G. Lord, calls this “a modern re-enactment of an ancient goddess-cult ritual”.

Baby-boomers who grew up with Barbie bought her for their children. Mattel needs those millennial children, now parents themselves, to do the same. But there is more competition these days: Barbie’s crown has been threatened by Elsa, the star of Disney’s “Frozen”; Lego is ascendant. So Mattel has given Barbie a makeover. In 2016 she was relaunched with seven skin tones and four new body shapes.

But what better marketing ploy than a feature-length advert? The doll’s on-screen universe is a kitschy, girlie utopia until one Barbie, played by Margot Robbie, starts asking existential questions. Trailers have lit up social media in advance of the film’s opening in cinemas on July 21st. It will take a truly determined parent to avoid Barbiemania this summer.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Devious evil butler looks heartlessly for quick solution (6,6)

1 across Davy Jones’s locker is a resting place, after ships capsize at last (6)

2 across Commotion about nothing turned into protests (5)

3 across Flower from beneath a mesh (6)

Factual clues
1 down What Ukrainian forces hoped a GPS-guided-weapons system would be (6,6)

1 across A source of nickel, cobalt, manganese and copper (6)

2 across What France has been roiled by, again (5)

3 across Something found to be full of sewage (6)



Quiz winners
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Louise Fairley, Edmonton, Canada

Pablo Vera Prendes, Mexico City, Mexico

Klaus Hereth, Munich, Germany

They all gave the correct answers of Barbara Bush, Jose Mourinho, Diego, Monica Seles, and Francisco Goya. The theme is Californian towns named after saints: Santa Barbara, San Jose, San Diego, Santa Monica and San Francisco.

The questions were:

Monday: Apart from Abigail Adams, who was the only woman to be the wife of one US President and mother of another?

Tuesday: Which football manager, who has won titles with Chelsea, Inter Milan and Real Madrid, is nicknamed “the Special One”?

Wednesday: Which animated children’s TV character is the cousin of Dora the Explorer?

Thursday: Which tennis champion was stabbed in the back in 1993 by an obsessed fan or rival Steffi Graf?

Friday: Which Spanish court painter is known for works such as “The Third of May 1808” and a portrait of the Duke of Wellington?

By the work one knows the workman.

Jean de La Fontaine
