The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 11, 2023
American regulators closed Silicon Valley Bank amid a run on the tech-focused lender. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation took control of SVB’s $175bn-worth of deposits and said insured depositors would have access to their money on Monday. America’s 16th-largest bank, having seen its deposits shrink during the VC winter, had failed to raise enough cash to stay afloat. The S&P 500 dipped by 1.5% on Friday to finish its worst week since September.

Iran and Saudi Arabia will resume bilateral ties and re-open embassies within two months, according to state media from both countries. The deal was brokered in China, where the head of Iranian Supreme National Security Council met with his Saudi counterpart. The two countries have long been regional rivals and officially cut diplomatic ties in 2016.

Britain will give France £480m ($577m) over the next three years to tackle the small-boat crisis. The funds will be used to strengthen patrols, including increasing the use of drones. A new migrant-detention centre will be built in northern France. The agreement was announced at a summit between the two countries’ leaders, who have sought to mend their fractious relationship.

American employers added 311,000 jobs in February, beating forecasts. The unemployment rate ticked up slightly to 3.6%. Average hourly wages rose at a muted pace, by 0.2% from the previous month. Resilience in the labour market may see the Federal Reserve opt for a half-point interest-rate rise later this month.

Meta is reportedly planning to lay off about 13% of its workforce, a substantial cut that is equal to the proportion that it sacked in 2022, according to the Wall Street Journal. The tech giant is expected to announce a first round of cuts next week, with more to follow. Meta has reported falling revenues in each of the past three quarters.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, confirmed that parliamentary and presidential elections will take place on May 14th. The election will pose a challenge for Turkey’s strongman: economic woes and a slow response to last month’s devastating earthquake have nibbled away at support for his government. Earlier this week the country’s main opposition coalition nominated Kemal Kilicdaroglu as their presidential candidate.

Britain’s economy grew by 0.3% in January, after contracting 0.5% in December. The surge was driven in part by the services sector which grew by 0.5%, although the manufacturing and construction industries slowed significantly. The news may allay fears of a recession, which the country narrowly avoided at the end of last year.

Word of the week: Prata, a folded fried bread of South Indian origin. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REX/SHUTTERSTOCK
Li Qiang becomes China’s PM
On Friday China’s National People’s Congress (the parliament) gave Xi Jinping a third five-year term as president. On Saturday it will rubber-stamp his choice as prime minister. There is little doubt that it will be Li Qiang, who in October took over as number two in the Communist Party. The 63-year-old Mr Li will replace Li Keqiang, who is retiring as prime minister after serving the maximum two terms.

Normally, managing the economy would be a big part of the prime minister’s job. But much of that task has been taken over by Mr Xi and new party teams he has created. The incoming Mr Li, a former party chief of Shanghai, may have an advantage over the outgoing Mr Li: closeness to Mr Xi. That could mean the president will trust the prime minister to experiment with economic reforms. Or Mr Li might just be a yes-man.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Greece's government under pressure
Greek railway workers will maintain protests over the weekend over the transport ministry’s asleep-at-the-wheel attitude. The workers contend that failures to update safety protocols, something they have sought for years, contributed to a collision on February 28th of two trains travelling in opposite directions on the same track. Fifty-seven people died in the crash.

Amid demonstrations that have occasionally turned violent, the government seems to have woken up. Kyriakos Mitsotakis, the prime minister, has taken responsibility for the accident, telling his cabinet that it “happened on our watch”. He has pledged €275m ($290m) to bring Greek railways in line with EU standards over the next three years.

That might not quell popular anger over cronyism and mismanagement. Wary of public fury, some lawmakers in Mr Mitsotakis’s centre-right New Democracy party want to delay a general election that is expected in April.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Female footballers flex their muscle
A year ago the American women’s football team agreed to a landmark deal with the United States Soccer Federation, the sport’s governing body, guaranteeing equal pay to that of the men’s squad. Their victory has empowered their peers elsewhere ahead of the Women’s World Cup in Australia and New Zealand, which starts in July. On Thursday Canada Soccer released details of its equal-pay offer to its women’s team, who have been on strike since February.

Players are demanding management changes, too. Last month in France Wendie Renard, the captain of the women’s team, and two other players announced that they would no longer play under the coach, Corinne Diacre, who had developed a reputation for ruthlessness. The revolt prompted France’s governing football body to sack Ms Diacre on Thursday. Similarly, several Spanish players are threatening to stay at home over disagreements with their coach, Jorge Vilda, whom they want fired. The growing popularity of women’s football means that governing bodies increasingly need their stars more than the footballers need their administrators.


PHOTO: SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Calls for a space-junk treaty
In recent years space exploration has been reinvigorated by geopolitical rivalries and new private players. But space junk could knock the industry off course before it lifts off. On Friday seven scientists from Britain and America, including one from NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, wrote to Science, a journal, calling for the establishment of a regulatory body to deal with debris outside Earth’s atmosphere.

Estimates of the volume of space junk vary, but the European Space Agency reckons that there are more than 1m pieces of at least 1cm across orbiting the planet. That number may soar in the years to come, given that 58,000 new satellites could be launched by 2030, according to European and American officials.

But satellite-makers have no incentive to clean up after themselves. There is also no international agreement covering space-junk, and it is not clear who is responsible for getting rid of it. The more debris in the atmosphere, the more dangerous and difficult launching new satellites becomes.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Laura Poitras, documentary filmmaker
Laura Poitras appreciates the risks that her subjects take. They are, in some cases, jeopardising their lives or careers. When she was making “Citizenfour”, a film about Edward Snowden, the American security contractor who went rogue, she backed up footage and entrusted it to a third-party, then destroyed the original files. Her portrayal of Mr Snowden—with its famous shot of the bespectacled leaker, sitting in a mirrored hotel room in Hong Kong—won Ms Poitras an Oscar for best documentary feature.

“All the Beauty and the Bloodshed”, for which she is up for a second Oscar on Sunday, has nothing to do with matters of national security. But she treats Nan Goldin, a photographer and the film’s subject, with the same care that she showed Mr Snowden. The documentary is about Ms Goldin’s campaign to strip the name of the Sackler family, the owners of the company that makes OxyContin, from the world’s largest museums, many of which house her work. It is a bracing look at Ms Goldin’s own history of addiction, domestic abuse and sex work. Ms Poitras told Ms Goldin that she could excise anything that felt too intimate. Ms Goldin, she said, wanted only to go “deeper”.

Ms Poitras, aged 59, grew up in Boston and previously worked as a chef. But she abandoned that for film school in San Francisco: cooking was about pleasing, rather than challenging, guests. Her training was largely in experimental filmmaking—her first teacher opened his course with what she described as “a 23-minute structuralist meditation on a hallway”.

Ms Poitras’s documentaries are more accessible: portraits of people at a crossroads, filled with old-fashioned human drama. Her subjects’ struggles, she told an interviewer, should make viewers interrogate how powerful people and institutions operate. Her goal is to “re-wire the audience” and get them “questioning”.

She favours presenting events as they unfold, rather than lining up talking heads to opine on past achievements. The protagonist of her 2006 film, “My Country, My Country”, is a doctor running for office in Iraq. The outcome of the race—like the result of Mr Snowden’s gambit and the success of Ms Goldin’s campaign—is far from assured. And the risks are real.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down In irregular state, stormy rains await troubled waters (6, 6)

1 across Social media broadcasting the passage of time (6)

2 across Seafaring vehicle, reversing, takes a left (5)

3 across Half term diet—gum mostly!—is monotonous (6)

Factual clues

1 down A waterway of powerful and erratic tides, currents, and politics (6, 6)

1 across A platform causing tensions between America and China (6)

2 across One of the capacities China has been developing over Taiwan (5)

3 across Something robots might be able to reduce in office (6)



This week's quiz winners
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Gideon Yuval, Mercer Island, Washington, America

Lisa Robeson, Bluffton, Ohio, America

Thomas May, London, United Kingdom

They all gave the correct answers of Thomas Dewey, Calvin and Hobbes, Ken Russell, Basil Hume and Sondra Locke.The theme is philosophers: John Dewey, Thomas Hobbes, Bertrand Russell, David Hume and John Locke.

Time is an illusion. Lunchtime doubly so.

Douglas Adams
