The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 6 hours ago (21:59 GMT+1 / 04:59 Hong Kong)

A federal judge in Florida said he would probably unseal part of the affidavit detailing the FBI’s justification for searching Donald Trump’s estate. He gave the agency a week to decide which parts to redact. The FBI has argued that releasing the affidavit would undermine its investigation into whether the former president mishandled classified documents, by dissuading witnesses from cooperating.

Allen Weisselberg, the longtime chief financial officer of Mr Trump’s real-estate business, pled guilty to 15 tax-related felony charges filed by New York’s attorney-general. He agreed to testify if called at a separate trial against the Trump Organisation. The plea deal means he could serve five months in prison, rather than up to 15 years. Prosecutors alleged that Mr Weisselberg evaded paying tax on perks, such as a rent-free apartment and school tuition for his grandchildren.

Russia warned of a human-made disaster at Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, which it captured in March, and threatened to shut it down if shelling continued. That would risk “a radiation disaster at the largest nuclear power plant in Europe”, said Energoatom, a Ukrainian nuclear company . On Thursday Russia’s foreign ministry rejected international calls to demilitarise the surrounding area.

America and Taiwan said they would begin trade talks, under an initiative established jointly in June. The first round of negotiations will take place in early autumn, said Sarah Bianchi, America’s deputy trade representative. China said it opposes the talks, and warned America to “stop making misjudgements”. The announcement comes as tensions between America and China over the status of the self-governing island—which China regards as a breakaway territory—are at their highest in decades.

Russia’s foreign ministry said it was pursuing “quiet diplomacy” with America over a potential prisoner swap involving Brittney Griner. The American basketball star was sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment for entering Russia with cannabis oil in her luggage. America has reportedly sought her release, along with that of Paul Whelan, a former marine detained in Moscow, in exchange for Viktor Bout, a Russian arms dealer locked up in Illinois.

Turkey’s central bank cut interest rates by one percentage point, despite inflation running at 80%. The move surprised investors, who expected the interest rate to remain at 14%. Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, thinks that high interest rates cause inflation and has fired central bankers who disagree.

Germany announced it would temporarily slash sales tax on gas, as the country prepares for shortages this winter. The reduction, from a 19% tax to 7%, will come into effect on October 1st and expire in March 2024. Olaf Scholz, the chancellor, said that the benefit of the tax cut will be greater than the burden of a simultaneous gas levy put on consumers.

Fact of the day: 51%, Visa’s net margin in 2021, making it one of the most profitable companies in the world. Read the full story.

South Korea and Japan court disaster

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Yoon Suk-yeol has historic ambitions for his country’s relationship with its neighbour Japan. On August 17th South Korea’s president said that the two countries’ enmity, stemming from Japan’s colonial rule over Korea from 1910 to 1945, could be swept aside “amicably and promptly”. His enthusiasm is understandable—a bit of bonhomie could make both countries richer and more secure, especially in the face of rising tensions in the region.

His optimism makes less sense. The path to rapprochement is long and treacherous, and the journey could end almost before it has begun. In 2018 South Korea’s courts approved the seizure of assets from certain Japanese companies, on the basis that Koreans had been forced to toil on their behalf during the second world war. The liquidated assets would be given to the victims. The companies refused to pay, but the court’s final decision may come as early as Friday. Forcing the firms to pay up will enrage Japan, and will probably put pay to Mr Yoon’s aspirations.

Russian-Israeli relations in the dock

PHOTO: REUTERS
Lawyers for the Jewish Agency for Israel, an international organisation which acts on behalf of the Israeli government, will appear in a Russian court on Friday. The Kremlin wants to disband its presence in the country. Russia accuses the JA, which helps Jews move to Israel, of illegally collecting the personal information of Russian citizens.

The threat seems to be a warning to Israel not to change its stance on the war in Ukraine. Israel has so far remained neutral, partly due to its own large Russian-speaking population. But the country’s prime minister, Yair Lapid, condemned Russia’s invasion before he took office. The scale of emigration since the start of the war suggests that many Jews agree with Mr Lapid. The JA reckons that around 20,500 Russian Jews have moved to Israel since March, over 12% of Russia’s estimated Jewish population. The Kremlin may succeed in shutting down the JA. But that will not convince other Jews to stay in Russia.

A deadly toll for aid workers

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Wherever there is conflict, there are people who run to help. Being an aid worker in unstable or violent regions always carries risks, but 2021 was the deadliest year in nearly a decade for humanitarian staff. According to data from Humanitarian Outcomes, a consultancy in London, 141 were killed.

On Friday the UN will mark World Humanitarian Day with a campaign to raise awareness about the rising toll on aid workers. Despite there being fewer violent incidents in 2021 compared with the previous two years, the 268 reported attacks, mostly shootings and airstrikes, resulted in more deaths, and 117 people were kidnapped.

South Sudan remains the most dangerous place in the world for aid workers. Afghanistan comes second, despite a dip in overall violence since the Taliban returned to power. With war now raging in Ukraine, this year could be even worse for humanitarians.


Mike Pence’s barnstorming

PHOTO: EPA
The Iowa state fair is a rite of passage for presidential hopefuls. In campaign years candidates and the hacks covering them flock there, to consume calorific inventions served on sticks and to glad-handle voters ahead of Iowa’s nominating contest, which comes first in the presidential-election cycle. The next presidential election is not until 2024, yet on Friday Mike Pence, Donald Trump’s former vice-president, will make an appearance in Des Moines. He comes to Iowa’s capital straight from New Hampshire, another early-voting state.

There he told attendees at an event that Republicans should stop attacking the FBI over its raid of his former boss’s estate, and that he would consider testifying before congressional investigators probing the Capitol riot on January 6th 2021. Mr Pence appears to have completely fallen out with Mr Trump; his itinerary suggests he may well covet the presidency for himself. Does presidential-campaign season now start before the mid-terms have even finished?

Stasi assassins, synths and a suitcase

PHOTO: JULIA TERJUNG
“Kleo” is intense—and brutal—from the off. Set after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the series, released on Netflix on Friday, follows Kleo Straub, a fictional former Stasi assassin. Straub embarks on a mission to settle scores, deploying disguises, dark humour and outlandish fashion choices that will remind many viewers of the BBC’s “Killing Eve”.

Feminist revenge dramas are in vogue. They can seem repetitive, but “Kleo” attempts to differentiate itself with a historical twist. The show explores the contrasts between east and west Germany in the post-Soviet era and is infused with real events and people, such as Erich Mielke, the Stasi chief. There is also a suitcase full of clues, for the spy-drama addicts. It is a novel way into a subgenre that every streaming company wants a slice of. And Netflix could do with a boost: it lost nearly 1m subscribers in the three months to July, the biggest drop in the company’s history.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: What is the currency of Armenia?

Thursday: Under the imperial system of measures, what unit was equal to 1/7000th of an avoirdupois pound?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of The World in Brief. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Chanakya Arora, New Delhi, India

North America: Evan McLain, Seattle, USA

Central and South America: Sebastian Agudelo-Restrepo, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic

Europe: Sriram Chari, Bath, UK

Africa: Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya

Oceania: Rob Hugall, Brisbane, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Burkina Faso, Baltic, Nukes and Oracle. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Learn from the mistakes of others. You can never live long enough to make them all yourself.

Groucho Marx
