The world in brief
May 12, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Pakistan’s Supreme Court ruled that the dramatic arrest on Tuesday of Imran Khan, a former prime minister, was unlawful and ordered his immediate release. Mr Khan will appear before the Islamabad High Court on Friday. He was detained by the country’s anti-graft agency over a land-fraud case but denies any wrongdoing. Earlier Pakistani authorities arrested three other senior members of Mr Khan’s Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party. Pakistan has been rocked by protests over his arrest.

One of the four candidates in Turkey’s presidential election withdrew amid a scandal just days before the vote on May 14th. Muharrem Ince’s departure may bolster support for Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the strongest challenger to Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the incumbent. Polling released by Konda Arastirma, a research company, showed that in early May Mr Erdogan lagged behind Mr Kilicdaroglu by over five percentage points.

The Biden administration proposed new rules that would limit greenhouse-gas emissions from America’s coal- and gas-fired power plants, requiring them to slash or capture almost all their carbon-dioxide output by 2038. The Environmental Protection Agency did not specify how power-plant operators should meet these targets. The fossil-fuel industry and Republican states will probably issue legal challenges to block the regulation.

The Bank of England raised interest rates by 0.25 percentage points to 4.5%, the highest level since 2008. The bank now expects to meet its 2% inflation target only in 2025, a year later than previously forecast. Inflation in Britain has proved more stubborn than in other European countries. Markets expect rates to peak at 5%.

Elon Musk, the boss of Tesla who flamboyantly acquired Twitter for $44bn in October, announced he will step down as chief executive of the social-media site. Mr Musk’s unnamed replacement will start in six weeks, when he will move to a product and technology role. Tesla’s share price rose by 2% on the news; some investors believed that his involvement was a distraction from the electric-vehicle firm.

America’s secretary of homeland security, Alejandro Mayorkas, stressed in a press conference that the country’s borders were “not open”. His message came hours before Title 42, a pandemic-era provision that has allowed officials to quickly turn away migrants at America’s southern border, was set to expire. Some cities in Texas have already declared a state of emergency, seeking more federal resources to handle the surge.

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said his forces must wait for deliveries of promised military aid before launching a large-scale counter-offensive against Russia. His statement came after Ukraine retook eight square kilometres of land outside Bakhmut, a town which has been fought over for months. Meanwhile Britain confirmed that it has supplied Ukraine with long-range Storm Shadow cruise missiles.

Fact of the day: $500bn, the amount that America’s banks have in unrealised losses on their securities portfolios. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Sánchez talks migration with Biden
On Friday Pedro Sánchez, Spain’s Socialist prime minister, will meet President Joe Biden for a propitiously timed meeting at the White House. Anticipating a surge of migrants across its southern border, America wants Spain to help ease the burden.

On May 4th America and Spain, along with Canada, vowed to strengthen co-operation on migration, especially from Central and South America. The three countries want more legal “circular” migration: for people to come, work and then leave. To do so they aim to set up centres in countries of origin, such as Colombia and Honduras, that will help would-be migrants find legal avenues out. The hope is that this will reduce the numbers making illegal crossings.

The timing of the meeting also suits Mr Sánchez, who faces regional elections on May 28th and national ones later in the year. He will relish the opportunity to discuss issues such as Ukraine with Mr Biden, and so to appear statesmanlike on the global stage.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Toshiba’s cautious path to private ownership
When Toshiba announces its annual earnings on Friday, observers will look for signs that years of corporate chaos are coming to an end. The Japanese conglomerate’s troubles began with an accounting scandal in 2015. It nearly went bankrupt two years later, surviving by selling off a valuable business and issuing $5.4bn of shares. But that opened the door to activist shareholders.

A buyout offer in 2021 from CVC Capital Partners, a private-equity firm, first raised the idea of taking the 147-year-old company off the publicly traded market. But the Japanese government was unsettled by the prospect of foreign ownership, given Toshiba’s interests in strategic industries such as nuclear energy and semiconductors. That deal fell through, and infighting between shareholders and management ensued.

In March Toshiba’s board approved a different $15bn deal from Japan Industrial Partners, a domestic consortium, which offered ¥4,620 ($34) per share, a 10% premium. Yet the board stopped short of immediately recommending the deal to shareholders. A final offer is expected in July.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
Britain’s economy in the doldrums
For a year Britain’s economy—like much of Europe’s—has been becalmed. GDP figures due on Friday may even show that it shrank a bit in the first quarter of 2023, judging by forecasts collated by Bloomberg. The economy is still smaller than it was before the covid-19 pandemic.

But the outlook seems a little brighter. The Bank of England said on Thursday that it no longer expects a recession. Consumers and businesses are becoming more confident. Inflation, 10.1% in the year to March, has been a drag on people’s spending power, but should fall sharply when the leap in energy prices after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine drops out of the annual calculation. Yet with the rate far above the bank’s target of 2% and the labour market still tight, the bank is taking no chances. On Thursday it raised its benchmark interest rate by another quarter of a percentage point, to 4.5%—and more increases look likely.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Turbulent times at SocGen
On Friday Société Générale, a big French bank, will present results for the first quarter. They come at a challenging time.

In February the bank reported a 64% drop in annual profits for 2022 owing in large part to a $3.3bn loss caused by the sale of its Russian business after the invasion of Ukraine, as well as higher provisions for bad loans. And in March French police raided the offices of Société Générale, BNP Paribas and three other banks as part of an investigation related to so-called “cum-cum” trades, used to evade taxes on dividend payments. Between them the five banks are now facing fines of more than €1bn ($1.1bn).

After 15 years at the helm Frédéric Oudea, the bank’s chief executive, will step down at its annual general meeting on May 23rd. Slawomir Krupa, a SocGen veteran who is his successor, will have his work cut out.


PHOTO: EYEVINE
Two long-lost artworks back on display
How could eight vibrant Art Deco paintings, each more than eight feet tall, disappear? That was the 50-year mystery surrounding a series of works by Winold Reiss, a renowned modernist artist. Painted in 1938 to decorate a restaurant in the Empire State Building, the works were lost during a renovation in the 1960s.

Reiss, who emigrated from Germany to New York in 1913, channelled his adopted city’s energy and optimism into his art. That optimism sustained art lovers who refused to believe that these works had been destroyed. Earlier this year a gallery director spotted a pair for sale online. The Reiss family authenticated them.

The two rediscovered works go on display from Friday at the TEFAF art fair in New York. “Animation” depicts a nude woman in a tropical setting fending off a leopard; “Temptation” shows an Eve-like figure with a snake. The search for the remaining six—including the appropriately titled “Anticipation”—continues.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Jacob Zuma and Mangosuthu Buthelezi are members of which South African ethnic group?

Thursday: Which historically important geographic formation spans from Alexandria in the west to Port Said in the east?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Denis Bradu, Chisinau, Moldova
Pat Rapp, Brooklyn, America
Hiroyuki Sakurai, Tokyo, Japan

They all gave the correct answers of King Charles, Kansas, Hague and strike. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Life is 10% what you make of it, and 90% how you take it.

Irving Berlin
