The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (22:30 GMT / 06:30 Hong Kong)

The World Health Organisation warned that Ukraine faces a “devastating energy crisis” this winter. Some 10m people, a quarter of the population, do not have access to power as Russian strikes have halved the country’s generating capacity. Separately, Russian officials in Crimea said they had repelled two Ukrainian drone attacks near Sevastopol, home to Russia’s Black Sea naval fleet.

Sam Bankman-Fried ran FTX as his “personal fiefdom”, said a lawyer for the crypto exchange at its first bankruptcy hearing in Delaware. The attorney added that “substantial” assets are either stolen or missing. Meanwhile, Sequoia Capital, a venture-capital firm, apologised to its investors for its loss of $150m on FTX and promised stronger due diligence in future, according to the Wall Street Journal.

America’s Supreme Court cleared the way for Congress to obtain Donald Trump’s tax returns. Since 2019 Mr Trump has tried to shield them from Democratic lawmakers investigating potential conflicts of interest in his dealings as both president and businessman. Republicans have promised to quash those probes when they assume control of the House in January.

The European Commission proposed a price cap on natural gas sold in the EU. The ceiling, set at €275 ($283) per megawatt-hour for month-ahead contracts on a key benchmark exchange, would serve as an emergency brake if prices were to soar past that level. The proposal will be debated by EU energy ministers on Thursday.

Cristiano Ronaldo left Manchester United “by mutual agreement”, according to the football club. The early end to his contract came a week after the 37-year-old star striker trashed the club’s management in a television interview and accused it of forcing him out. Separately, the Glazer family, the club’s majority owners, said they are considering selling it. The club has a market capitalisation of $2.5bn on the New York Stock Exchange but could probably fetch a higher price.

Cyril Ramaphosa, South Africa’s president, is ahead in the competition to lead the African National Congress into the next election, in 2024. Mr Ramaphosa, who is the current head of the ruling party, received over 2,000 nominations while his nearest competitor, Zweli Mkhize, a former health minister, has about 900. The ANC is due to hold a conference in December where the party will make the final decision.

Italy’s right-wing government agreed on the details of its budget for next year, which includes a windfall tax of 35% on the profits of energy companies until mid-2023. The package of tax cuts and increased spending worth €35bn ($36bn), which earmarks funds to fight high energy prices, will be mainly funded through borrowing. But the target deficit of 4.5% of GDP next year has assuaged fears of the high-debt country colliding with the EU.

Fact of the day: $1.5bn, the loss of Disney’s streaming division in the past quarter. Read the full story.

Turkey threatens to march into Syria

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
“We have been bearing down on terrorists for a few days with our planes, cannons and guns,” declared Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Tuesday. Tanks and soldiers, Turkey’s president added, would follow. Mr Erdogan has been threatening for months a military operation in northern Syria. Last year parliament extended by two years the government’s mandate to move troops into Iraq and Syria. But Mr Erdogan’s argument for a ground incursion has been growing louder since November 13th, when a bomb attack in Istanbul began a deadly tit-for-tat.

Turkey blamed the bomb on the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, a rebel group fighting for Kurdish self-rule within Turkey. The group denied that claim. On Sunday Turkish rockets rained down on Kurdish militants in Iraq and Syria; a retaliatory strike on Monday killed two Turkish citizens in Gaziantep, a province adjacent to Syria. Although tensions are rising, the West has been loth to restrain Mr Erdogan, who has become a helpful go-between in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine.


Credit Suisse refills its coffers

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Wednesday Credit Suisse holds an extraordinary general meeting for shareholders. The Swiss bank needs their approval to raise more capital for an ambitious restructuring plan it announced in late October. Ravaged by scandal and losses, Credit Suisse needs at least SFr4bn ($4.2bn) from investors to pad its balance-sheet. The Saudi National Bank is expected to buy a 9.9% stake, worth SFr1.5bn. That would make it the Swiss bank’s biggest shareholder.

In its new incarnation Credit Suisse plans to focus on international wealth management, as well as its domestic bank and asset-management division. Investment banking will be radically downsized to reduce risk, with Credit Suisse First Boston, the investment-banking arm of Credit Suisse, spun off. It will also let go of its securitised products business. And as it seeks a path back to stability, Credit Suisse plans to lay off around 9,000 of its 52,000 employees.

Legal wrangling over Scottish independence

PHOTO: ALAMY
A decision by Britain’s highest court on Wednesday could determine the future of the United Kingdom. Judges of the Supreme Court will rule on whether Scotland’s devolved parliament, in Edinburgh, may pass a law calling for a referendum on independence without the approval of Britain’s government, in Westminster.

In a vote in 2014, held with the approval of David Cameron’s government, Scots rejected independence by 55% to 45%. But Brexit, which Scots voted against, along with dampened confidence in the British government, could make continued union less palatable.

If the court allows her, Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, wants a referendum on October 19th 2023. But most legal scholars doubt the court will prove so helpful to her Scottish Nationalist Party. Instead, judges are likely either to rule that a referendum requires the approval of the British government, or to declare that the question remains hypothetical until a referendum law has been proposed, prolonging Scotland’s constitutional limbo.

Russia’s security club hobbles on

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO), a supposed military alliance between Russia and five ex-Soviet countries—Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan—began the year with a show of strength. In January Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, Kazakhstan’s president, invoked the organisation’s collective-security clause to deal with anti-government protests. Within hours the Russian army came to his aid. But when CSTO leaders convene in Armenia on Wednesday to discuss regional security, spirits will have dropped.

Russia, which keeps its troops in CSTO countries as part of the security pact, has been overstretched by its war in Ukraine. Family feuds have also hobbled the organisation. Last month, amid a simmering border conflict between Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, “Indestructible Brotherhood-2022” a joint military operation, was called off. In September Armenia asked the organisation for weapons to fend off an attack from its bitter foe Azerbaijan, but the CSTO was able to muster only a fact-finding mission. That may be the best the club’s members can hope for.

Steven Spielberg’s origin story

PHOTO: AP
What makes a superstar film-maker? Steven Spielberg offers a moving answer in “The Fabelmans,” a thinly disguised account of his upbringing that is released across America on Wednesday. Raised by a computer-engineer father (Paul Dano) and piano-playing mother (Michelle Williams), Samuel Fabelman is left shaken after he sees the climactic train crash in Cecil B. DeMille’s “The Greatest Show on Earth” (1952). Sammy (Gabriel LaBelle) spends the rest of his life trying to recreate that sense of awe by making his own moving images.

The director of “E.T.”, “Jaws” and most recently “West Side Story” is America’s best-known conjuror of cinematic fantasy; it is not easy to picture his origins in quotidian reality. But Mr Spielberg paints a detailed, emotionally intelligent portrait of his postwar Jewish suburban family—loving, yet gradually fractured by parental conflict—but avoids the amber-tinged nostalgia of much boomer-era biography. Funny and wise, the film is one by a consummate showman slowing down to reflect.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which marsupial featured as a ferocious Warner Brothers cartoon character?

Tuesday: The French novel “Les Liaisons Dangereuses” was remade as a teenage movie drama in 1999 with which title?

Those who trust us educate us.

George Eliot
