The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (04:22 GMT / 12:22 Hong Kong)

Central banks in Europe and Britain followed the lead of the Federal Reserve by raising interest rates by 0.5 percentage points, lower than the previous rises of 0.75. The Bank of England’s hike—its ninth consecutive rise—took its rate to 3.5%, the highest level in 14 years. Meanwhile, the European Central Bank raised its rate from 1.5% to 2%, the highest since the global financial crisis in 2008. The ECB suggested it expects further rises to come as inflation remains well-above its medium-term 2% target, even if it has reached its peak. Euro-zone inflation was 10% in November, down from 10.6% in October.

Consumers in America tightened their belts in November: retail sales fell by 0.6% from the previous month, the sharpest drop in nearly a year and well below forecasts. The decline came despite the boost to real incomes from falling petrol prices, indicating that rising interest rates and slowing employment growth are starting to bite. The S&P 500 shed 2.5%.

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, said that 64 Ukrainian prisoners of war had been freed from Russian captivity in a prisoner exchange. An American citizen was also freed in the swap. Ukrainian officials did not say how many Russian prisoners they released in return. Meanwhile, an “unknown drone” struck a Russian airbase in Kursk, near the border with Ukraine, according to the country’s officials.

An American accounting regulator said it had scrutinised the books of eight Chinese firms listed in New York. The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board said it had found numerous potential deficiencies. Still, the inspection represented a breakthrough: China had long refused to grant it full access to the audit records, until America threatened to delist some 200 Chinese firms from its stock exchanges.

The Wagner Group, a Russian firm of private mercenaries, is helping Burkina Faso’s government fight jihadists, according to Ghana’s president. Nana Akufo-Addo alleged that the Russian group received a mine as payment for deploying soldiers, who operate in at least six other African countries. In the past year alone, Burkina Faso has been rocked by two miliary coups and has seen more than 3,100 people killed by jihadist violence.

Elon Musk unloaded $3.6bn more of shares in his electric car company, Tesla. That brings the total to almost $23bn since Mr Musk announced a $44bn takeover of Twitter. Tesla’s shares fell by more than 60% this year. Investors are worried that inflation could squeeze demand for the company’s fancy cars—and that its boss is too distracted to run the firm.

The UN postponed decisions about whether to allow representatives from Afghanistan’s Taliban administration and Myanmar’s military junta to represent their countries at the general assembly. The UN’s assent would have been an important step in both regimes’ quests for international recognition. For now the envoys that preceded regime changes in both countries will retain their positions. The UN will revisit the issue in nine months.

Fact of the day: 12,000, the number of new regulations introduced by the American government in 2021, a rise on recent years. Read the full story.

Beefing up Japan’s defences

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Japan’s security policy will take a leap forward on Friday, when the government releases long-awaited revisions to its national security strategy. Japan will codify plans to raise defence spending to 2% of GDP by 2027, up from around 1% today. At current levels, that would make Japan the world’s third-largest defence spender in absolute terms. The government also plans to acquire long-range missiles that would allow it to strike targets in enemy territory. Both moves represent breaks in precedent in a country where pacifism has been dominant since the end of the second world war.

Big questions remain. One is what exactly the new money will be spent on. The other is where it will come from. Yet, strikingly, there has been no major domestic opposition to the government’s proposals. A combination of China’s aggressive posture, North Korea’s increasingly brazen missile programme and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine have convinced the Japanese that they can no longer afford to skimp on security.


Life is still too dangerous for Indian women

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Friday marks ten years to the day since Jyoti Singh, a 23-year-old physiotherapy student, was raped and mutilated by a group of men on a bus in Delhi. She later died of her injuries.

A decade on, not enough has changed. In May Shraddha Walkar, a call-centre worker, vanished in Delhi. She had previously told police that her partner, with whom she lived, beat and threatened to dismember her. He confessed to ultimately doing so last month. Most violence against Indian women happens at home: in a survey 30% of married or previously married women said they had been subject to domestic abuse.

Jyoti Singh’s case did prompt change. Several new laws make the prosecution of sexual-assault cases easier, the Supreme Court strengthened women’s rights in several areas and the share of victims who reported sex crimes rose somewhat. But much more work is needed. Half of Indians still say it is acceptable for husbands to beat their wives. Until social attitudes change, women will remain in peril.

The ANC’s big meeting in Johannesburg

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
When the African National Congress begins its national conference on Friday, the arena will reverberate with old songs about fighting apartheid. Indeed, there is more to celebrate in the past of South Africa’s ruling party than in its present—or future. After 28 years of ANC governments South Africans are increasingly fed up with the party, which is expected to lose its majority at the next general election in 2024.

At the conference the party will choose its leadership to fight that election. Despite a recent corruption scandal Cyril Ramaphosa, president of both party and country, is expected to hold on to power. His supporters say that if he can muster enough allies in top party positions, he will finally be able to pursue economic reforms and clean up corruption. Yet that is naive. Not even Nelson Mandela, the ANC’s most famous leader, would be able to renew the party today. It is a machine for patronage, not for progress.

Sweden inches towards NATO

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Friday the Riksdag, Sweden’s parliament, will discuss the country’s defence budget. Sweden applied this year to join NATO alongside Finland, its Nordic neighbour, following Russia’s attack on Ukraine. Sweden had planned to reach the alliance’s defence-spending target of 2% of GDP by 2028, but may now bring that target forward by two years.

But the pair’s NATO applications have been held up by Hungary and Turkey, two other members of the alliance. On Tuesday, after the EU agreed to let it access billions in aid, Hungary lifted its veto and confirmed its parliament would debate Swedish and Finnish accession in February. Meanwhile, Sweden has been courting Turkey. In September it lifted an informal ban on selling military equipment to the country. And reports emerged this month that Sweden’s government has deported people to Turkey suspected of ties to the PKK, a Kurdish rebel group that has long been a thorn in the side of Turkish leaders. It remains unclear if the concessions will do the trick.

The sequel to “Avatar” finally arrives

PHOTO: CAPITAL PICTURES
On Friday the long-awaited sequel to “Avatar”, a science-fiction blockbuster released in 2009, will finally hit the screens. Its director, James Cameron, has an impressive record. The first “Avatar” is the highest-grossing film ever made; another of Mr Cameron’s efforts, “Titanic”, is in third place. But “Avatar: The Way of Water” may struggle to make such a big splash.

The sequel continues the adventures of Jake Sully (played by Sam Worthington), an American Marine whose mind has been zapped into a cloned alien body. He now defends his Edenic adopted home world, Pandora, from invading human colonists. The computer-generated imagery is spectacular. Yet the action doesn’t merit the film’s running time of over three hours. The protagonist spends half of that on a tropical island, bonding with local sea creatures. Mr Cameron may be saving his best story ideas for later: three more instalments of the franchise are due before 2030. Fans must hope they are worth the wait.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: What hollow snack is often handed out to guests in Chinese restaurants after a meal?

Thursday: Which lyricist collaborated with Richard Rodgers on the musicals “Oklahoma!” and “South Pacific”?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Yumi Arima, Tokyo, Japan
Mark Westin, Warsaw, Poland
Trevor Ford, Thirlmere, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of South Africa, sharia, asset and asylum. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.

Arthur C. Clarke
