The world in brief
March 29, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

American prosecutors charged Sam Bankman-Fried, the founder of FTX, a now defunct crypto exchange, with bribing Chinese officials. The American government alleges that Mr Bankman-Fried paid $40m worth of cryptocurrency to regain access to trading accounts, holding more than $1bn, which had been frozen by the Chinese authorities. Mr. Bankman-Fried is facing twelve other criminal charges (he pleads not guilty to most) following the spectacular implosion of his empire in November.

Alibaba announced plans to split up its sprawling tech empire into six independent units, the largest restructuring in the firm’s history. The new companies, apart from one handling Chinese commerce, will raise outside capital and eventually seek listings. Alibaba is hoping to restore the value of its shares after a crackdown on tech companies by Chinese authorities, beginning in 2020, reduced their price by about 70%.

A judge ordered Mike Pence, former vice-president under Donald Trump, to testify before a grand jury about conversations he had with Mr Trump leading up to the January 6th riot at the Capitol. The Justice Department’s investigation into Mr Trump’s efforts to overturn the 2020 election is one of several legal challenges the former president could soon face. A separate indictment over a hush-money payment could come this week.

Deposits worth $100bn were scheduled to be withdrawn from Silicon Valley Bank the day that regulators seized it, according to an official from America’s Federal Reserve. That figure, plus the $42bn withdrawn the previous day, represented more than 80% of SVB’s total deposits, as of year-end 2022. Regulators were asked to testify before a Senate committee about the bank’s stunning collapse; they largely cited executive mismanagement.

French prosecutors raided the Paris offices of five major banks, including HSBC and BNP Paribas, in an investigation into tax fraud and money laundering. The institutions are accused of performing “cum-cum” deals, which involve the temporary transfer of stocks to evade dividend tax. The lenders face the prospect of fines totalling more than €1bn ($1.08bn).

MI5, Britain’s security service, raised the terrorist threat in Northern Ireland to “severe”. Previously the level was “substantial”— the same as the rest of Britain— but an increase in violent Irish republicanism has forced it up. Last month the “New IRA”, a republican group, shot a senior police detective, John Caldwell, in the city of Omagh.

An Australian company produced a woolly mammoth meatball to demonstrate the potential of lab-grown meat. The team used a mixture of mammoth and elephant DNA. (They originally wanted to make a dodo dish, but the necessary DNA sequences do not exist.) No one has yet eaten the prehistoric meatball but the taste would be hard to verify: mammoths went extinct 4,000 years ago.

Fact of the day: 118,000, the number of sackings that American tech firms have announced this year according to Crunchbase, a data provider. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
What next for Israel’s political crisis
Negotiating teams representing the parties in the Knesset, Israel’s parliament, will spend Wednesday trying to hash out a compromise on constitutional reform. The dialogue, conducted through the office of Isaac Herzog, the president, follows three months of widespread protests against a judicial overhaul planned by Binyamin Netanyahu, the prime minister. His proposed legislation would weaken the Supreme Court and allow governments to appoint judges to the bench.

In recent days the tension reached fever pitch. On Sunday Mr Netanyahu fired his defence minister for publicly opposing the reforms. That inspired tens of thousands of Israelis to take to the streets. By Monday morning a general strike had brought much of the country to a halt. That evening Mr Netanyahu finally agreed to “suspend” the legislation. Still, he says, it is just a “time out”: even if the parties cannot reach agreement, the law is still ready to be brought before the Knesset in May.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
The World Bank’s new president
Wednesday marks the end of the nomination period for the next president of the World Bank. As in every election bar one in 2012, there is just one candidate. America has picked every World Bank president since striking a gentlemen’s agreement in 1944 with Europe, which in turn selects the head of the IMF. America also has an outsize influence at the organisation in general, enjoying more voting rights over lending decisions than any other country.

This time the White House’s pick is Ajay Banga, a former boss of Mastercard, who seems set to start in June. A businessman with little government experience appears an unusual choice to tackle the World Bank’s bulging bureaucracy, which is struggling to increase its lending capacity and restructure its debts. But on the bank’s biggest challenge—helping poor countries tackle climate change—Mr Banga could be a decent fit. At Mastercard, he devoted blog posts to climate issues and started a project to plant 100m trees. That may not be much, but it at least sets Mr Banga apart from his predecessor, David Malpass, who at times seemed to question the reality of global warming itself.



PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
A climate-change first at the ECHR
On Wednesday the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg will hear its first ever climate case. More than 2,000 elderly Swiss women argue that their government’s negligence in tackling climate change has violated their rights. The women—average age: 73—say their advanced years leave them particularly vulnerable to global warming. Studies show that higher temperatures are more dangerous for older people; one, published last year, found that adults aged over 65 accounted for 87% of heat-related deaths in Switzerland between 1969 and 2017. And older women are statistically more vulnerable than their male counterparts.

The case, initiated by Greenpeace Switzerland, and six years in the making ,was twice rejected by domestic courts. Whether the ECHR decides it is admissible—and, if so, how it rules—could set a precedent for similar cases across Europe. And they are growing apace: the ECHR has two more climate-related hearings on its docket.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Biden’s global democratic jamboree
President Joe Biden’s second Summit for Democracy kicks off on Wednesday. Its ostensible purpose is to improve the quality of the world’s democracies, and to help increase their number. Two days of virtual talks will include representatives from 120 governments: those with stellar democratic credentials (Norway and New Zealand) and others with shakier records (India, Israel and Mexico).

The first summit, held in December 2021, agreed to increase women’s participation in government, enhance anti-corruption laws and strengthen independent judiciaries. But progress is not checked. The second edition may thus serve more as a demonstrative foil to the diplomatic overtures of Russia and China, whose leaders met last week in Moscow. Their transactional approach finds favour in much of the developing world. Both autocracies were left off Mr Biden’s invite list—as was Turkey, a functioning democracy that has nonetheless moved closer to Russia.


PHOTO: CHARLES DICKENS MUSEUM
Dickens’s poetic, polluted London
“Fog everywhere,” notes the narrator at the start of “Bleak House”. The stuff permeates all of Charles Dickens’s novels about London, both literally and figuratively. Indeed, Dickens probably contributed significantly to the stereotype of the city as permanently shrouded in a pea-souper. Now the Dickens Museum, located on Doughty Street in one of the author’s old houses in London, is mounting a show on how that miasma influenced the writer’s life and work.

“A Great and Dirty City: Dickens and the London Fog”, which opens on Wednesday, includes artefacts such as a handkerchief of Maltese lace used by Dickens’s wife to cover her mouth and nose on her walks. There is also a figurine of Joe from “The Pickwick Papers” that was kept in a bell jar to protect it from soot, even inside the home. Dickens’s own fire poker is also on display: a reminder that the domestic hearth, a beloved Victorian symbol of familial togetherness, was also responsible for most of London’s pollution.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Wednesday: Which Irish county contains the Dingle peninsula and the Macgillycuddy’s Reeks mountains?

Tuesday: Which library classification system was originally devised in 1876?

Comedy is simply a funny way of being serious.

Peter Ustinov
