The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 6 hours ago (22:08 GMT / 06:08 Hong Kong)

Wall Street slumped at the prospect that further unrest in China and rising covid-19 cases would slow its economy. The S&P 500 and the Dow Jones Industrial Average each shed 1.5%. After tens of thousands of Chinese people rallied against the country’s draconian anti-covid measures, the White House affirmed their “right to peacefully protest”. The number of new infections reported in China hit a record 40,000.

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, said that residents of the southern Kherson region endured 258 rounds of Russian shelling this past week alone. Millions of people have only limited access to electricity, water and heat after Russian missiles pulverised much of Ukraine’s energy infrastructure, including a pumping station providing water to Mykolaiv, a city north of Kherson.

BlockFi, a crypto lender, filed for bankruptcy. The firm, valued at $4bn dollars at one point last year, failed to recover from the collapse of FTX, the crypto-trading platform that also went bankrupt earlier this month. Separately, Kraken, another crypto exchange, agreed to pay more than $360,000 to America’s treasury department for allowing transactions with users in Iran, in violation of sanctions.

Talks between America and Russia on the “New START” treaty—meant to regulate their arsenals of strategic missiles—were postponed the day before they were due to start. America blamed Russia, accusing it of “unilaterally” calling off the summit scheduled to take place in Cairo, Egypt’s capital. The decision comes amid months of nuclear threats from President Vladimir Putin in response to Western support for Ukraine.

Saudi Arabia unveiled plans to build a mammoth airport with six runways in Riyadh, the capital. It will serve as the hub for a yet-to-be-launched state airline called RIA to compete with Emirates, which is based in Dubai. The kingdom is keen to wean its economy off oil and boost tourism—the airport will be able to accommodate 120m passengers by 2030, if all goes to plan.

Shell agreed to buy Europe’s largest biogas producer for nearly $2bn as it expands into renewables. Nature Energy, based in Denmark, produces biomethane, which is chemically identical to natural gas but is made from organic waste. In October BP, another oil major, agreed to pay more than $4bn for Archaea Energy, an American biogas producer.

Football World Cup: Brazil scored in the 83rd minute to beat Switzerland 1-0. The winning goal came not from legendary Neymar, who is nursing a swollen ankle and has sat out two games, but from veteran midfielder Casemiro. Another superstar, Cristiano Ronaldo, claimed credit for Portugal’s opening goal in its 2-0 win against Uruguay; in fact Bruno Fernandes was responsible for both goals.

Fact of the day: 7m, the number of people that have left Venezuela in the last decade, a quarter of the population. Read the full story.

What’s behind the selection of Pakistan’s new army chief

PHOTO: AP
Pakistan’s army has long been regarded as wielding more political influence than the country’s hapless politicians. But the appointment of Syed Asim Munir, who takes over from Qamar Javed Bajwa as the chief of the army on Tuesday, looks at least partly driven by party politics. General Munir’s tenure as head of Pakistan’s spy agency was cut short in 2019 after he fell out with Imran Khan, then the prime minister. Mr Khan was himself ousted by Parliament in April and has since set about trying to undermine the government of Shehbaz Sharif, his successor.

Mr Sharif seems to have appointed Mr Munir partly because he sees him as a counterweight to Mr Khan. Yet the army’s reputation among voters has been damaged by Mr Khan’s unproven allegation that military leaders conspired with America to remove him from power. Many soldiers in the army’s lower ranks are quiet supporters of the former prime minister. The new chief will have to work hard to regain the confidence of ordinary soldiers and other Pakistanis.

Emmanuel Macron goes to Washington

PHOTO: AP
The French president will arrive in Washington, DC on Tuesday evening for his second state visit to America (he was hosted by Donald Trump in 2018) and the first full state visit that President Joe Biden has hosted. Expect much celebration of America and France’s long friendship—both countries like to say they are each other’s oldest ally. Emmanuel Macron will be treated to the works, including a state banquet at the White House.

The war in Ukraine and geopolitical shifts mean that there will be tensions to manage, too. The French and American positions on Russia have converged: both countries firmly support Ukraine while also seeking to avoid escalation and ultimately favouring a diplomatic solution to the conflict. The thorniest immediate issue will be America’s massive subsidies for clean energy and semiconductors. Europe, France included, considers these a breach of international-trade rules and fears for its own industries, battered by soaring energy prices. New problems will test even the oldest of allies.

Why the world faces more water stress

PHOTO: AP
On Tuesday the World Meteorological Organisation publishes, for the first time, an evaluation of global water resources. The findings will be bleak. At COP27, held in Egypt earlier this month, governments noted the “critical” need for “protecting, conserving and restoring water systems”. There is a growing understanding of the relationship between water scarcity and higher global temperatures, and of the need to manage water supplies in order to adapt to climate change.

Global warming worsens natural disasters that affect the availability of water: droughts are longer and more frequent; storms and rising sea levels contaminate water used for drinking and washing. Climate change is also depleting stocks of freshwater held in glaciers, snow and permafrost. According to the UN, by 2050 1.6bn people will be at risk of floods (up from 1.2bn currently), while 3.2bn may live in water-scarce areas (up from 1.9bn in 2010). And water, or its lack, influences economies, too: in Britain and Europe droughts currently cause around $9bn in losses each year.


America’s army recruitment woes

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
For the fiscal year ending September 2022, America’s army fell 15,000 short of its goal of 60,000 new recruits. On Tuesday grandees—including Major General Johnny Davis, who oversees recruitment—will discuss the problem at the Heritage Foundation, a think-tank in Washington. What explains the shortfall? A red-hot job market has increased competition for workers. And the pandemic saw higher obesity rates and worse academic performance, shrinking the pool of eligible recruits.

Fewer want to sign up, anyway. The army says that just 9% of eligible candidates are actually interested in joining, the lowest level for 15 years. America’s chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan is partly to blame. So is political polarisation: many on the left see America’s army as stuffy and outdated; those on the right accuse it of being too woke. The army is now stepping up outreach in schools and universities and offering bigger signing bonuses. If that fails to do the trick, some reservists may be put on active duty.

America and Iran meet on the football field

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America and Iran have had no diplomatic relations since 1980. Representatives of the two countries almost never come face-to-face, in any arena. But on Tuesday their football teams will face off at the World Cup in Qatar. To stay in the tournament America must win; Iran needs at least a draw. At their previous (and only) World Cup fixture, in 1998, Iran took the honours 2-1.

The match follows months of anti-government demonstrations in Iran, which America has supported. Before their first game in Qatar, the Iranian squad appeared to stage a protest by standing silent during their national anthem. At the second the players did sing, but many Iranians think they were coerced. And last weekend America’s football federation posted a version of Iran’s flag on social media, minus the logo of the Islamic Republic (it was later deleted). Neither side is likely to acknowledge it publicly, but the resonance of Tuesday’s game will extend far beyond the stadium in Doha.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which 1948 Hitchcock movie appears to take place in real time?

Monday: Which TV streaming service is named after the NBC logo?

Love is a great beautifier.

Louisa May Alcott
