The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 2 hours ago (22:59 GMT+1 / 05:59 Hong Kong)

The European Commission’s president, Ursula von der Leyen, outlined plans for a windfall tax on energy companies that will aim to raise €140bn ($140bn). The levy would be used by EU member states to shield consumers and businesses from sky-high energy prices resulting from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Mrs von der Leyen suggested the EU was “in for the long haul” in Ukraine.

Sweden’s Social Democratic prime minister, Magdalena Andersson, conceded defeat in recent elections and said she would resign on Thursday. According to the most recent tallies right-wing parties scored a three-seat majority. That means Ulf Kristersson of the centre-right Moderate party will lead talks between them to form a government. Once shunned by other parties, the anti-immigrant Sweden Democrats won the second-largest number of votes.

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, promised to free all Russian-occupied territories including Crimea, the peninsula annexed by Russia in 2014. He made the comments while visiting the city of Izyum, which was liberated during Ukraine’s recent counter-offensive. Meanwhile Reuters reported that Russian officials told Vladimir Putin earlier in the war that a peace deal had been struck in which Ukraine agreed not to join NATO, but that Russia’s president rejected it.

California filed an antitrust lawsuit against Amazon, claiming that the e-retailer penalises merchants for selling their wares on other sites at cheaper prices. Amazon prevents price competition through “coerced agreements”, the state alleged in its complaint, and demotes merchants who fail to abide by those rules. The state attorney-general wants such contracts banned in California, where Amazon has 25m customers.

The 83-year-old founder of Patagonia, a privately held maker of outdoor apparel based in California, pledged all of its future profits to fighting climate change. Yvon Chouinard said he had set up a charity to disburse Patagonia’s profits, which amount to about $100m a year. He said the arrangement was preferable to selling Patagonia and donating the proceeds, or taking the company public.

Armenia claimed that Azerbaijan had restarted strikes on its territories, just a day after Russia said it had brokered a ceasefire between the Caucasian countries. Both sides claim that the truce has been broken by the other. Around 100 Armenian and 50 Azerbaijani soldiers have been killed in the fighting. The clashes are the deadliest since a six-week war in 2020.

A court in St Petersburg set in motion the dissolution of a local council, after some of its members called for Mr Putin to be removed from office. One of the councillors claimed they had also been fined 47,000 roubles ($780) for “discrediting” the regime. The Russian president is under pressure at home as the war in Ukraine goes sour.

Fact of the day: 100m, the probable number of samples in the world’s largest forensic DNA database, held at China’s ministry of public security. Read the full story.

France faces an energy squeeze

PHOTO: REUTERS
Like the rest of Europe, France has been battered by the inflationary consequences of Russia’s war on Ukraine. But the French have been largely protected from the worst of the blow. Inflation figures, released on Thursday, are expected to show that prices have been rising more modestly in France than elsewhere in Europe. This is mainly because President Emmanuel Macron’s government has protected consumers from soaring energy prices. On Wednesday it said it would further limit gas and electricity price rises for households to 15% next year.

France has also been partly shielded from the tumult in global gas prices by its unusual dependence on nuclear power, which provides 42% of its energy supply. Still, this nuclear preponderance currently presents its own challenge. France is usually a net exporter of electricity. But over half of its 56 nuclear reactors are down for maintenance. That has left the country having to import electricity at high wholesale prices.


Xi and Putin talk shop in Samarkand

PHOTO: EPA
Western leaders are not invited to the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation’s summit, which takes place in Uzbekistan on Thursday and Friday. The Kremlin says that Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, will meet his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, on the sidelines of the event to discuss Ukraine and Taiwan. Some other attendees, including Iran’s president, Ebrahim Rasi, share the pair’s anti-American worldview.

But the West has nothing to fear from the SCO. Founded by China, Russia and four Central Asian states in 2001, it is largely a talking-shop that focuses on regional economic and security issues. It is known for its ineffectiveness, made worse by a string of enlargements. India and Pakistan joined in 2017, importing to the SCO their fraught historical relationship. Iran’s accession, agreed in 2021, imperils consensus, too. Mr Xi and Mr Putin may wax lyrical about their visions of a “multipolar” world, but the SCO itself will focus on more grounded topics, such as the construction of two Chinese-backed railway lines in Central Asia.

A looming rail strike in America

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Much of American industry runs on rails. Nearly a third of domestic cargo shipments are moved by train. Disruptions can wreak havoc with supply chains. Yet America’s 115,000 railway workers may soon stop work. For two years their unions and railway bosses have failed to agree on a pay deal. Mediators, sent by President Joe Biden in July, failed to break the impasse. Negotiations will come down to the wire on Thursday: a designated mediation period ends first thing on Friday, at which point unions may call a strike.

In August the railway companies agreed to increase wages by 24% over five years, though two of the 12 unions want more concessions. Congress may ultimately force them to accept the offered terms. But the big train firms have worries beyond this dispute. Staff shortages, exacerbated by years of lay-offs, have slowed service. Regulators are irked. The head of the Surface Transportation Board has scolded carriers for their “attitude of indifference” and promised more oversight.

Britain’s queen lies in state

PHOTO: REUTERS
One week after the death of Queen Elizabeth II, Thursday marks the first full day of her lying in state in London. Up to 750,000 people are expected to queue for miles to glimpse her coffin in Westminster Hall.

Lying in state is observed by many countries. In Britain it is the preserve of sovereigns, their consorts and select prime ministers. The modern tradition of lying in state at Westminster Hall started in 1898 with prime minister William Gladstone. Queen Victoria declined the honour. Her son, Edward VII, became the first monarch to do so, in 1910.

Elizabeth’s coffin is guarded by a vigil of soldiers. Her four children will take a turn, too. That ritual is the “Vigil of the Princes”. Yet in Scotland this week Anne, the Princess Royal, became the first woman ever to take part. In death as in life, the queen coaxes the royal family a little further into the modern world.

Ukraine’s pirouettes of patriotism

PHOTO: PRESS ASSOCIATION
An old conservatory in The Hague has become a haven for more than 50 ballet dancers forced by war to flee Ukraine. Spurred into action by Igone de Jongh, a Dutch former prima ballerina who became their artistic director, and supported by English and Dutch ballet companies, the dancers formed the United Ukrainian Ballet.

This week the group performs “Giselle”, a romantic tragedy, at the Coliseum in London. For the dancers in exile, every penché and pirouette is felt to be an act of patriotism—and a moment of respite from thoughts of war. Ballet is a “way to express my emotions…not to hold everything inside”, says Oleksii Kniazkov, a dancer from Kharkiv. Alexei Ratmansky, a luminary choreographer who grew up in Kyiv, is working with the company. The themes of hope and forgiveness in “Giselle” resonate, he explains. “It’s telling us that love is stronger than death.” That is worth dancing for.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: What is the real name of the Hulk, a Marvel superhero?

Wednesday: Which American basketball team won successive NBA championships in 1994 and 1995?

Where large sums of money are concerned, it is advisable to trust nobody.

Agatha Christie
