The world in brief May 31, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 23:49 GMT+1 / 06:49 Hong Kong

The EU agreed to a partial ban on Russian oil, exempting oil delivered by pipeline in a compromise to satisfy Hungary. The embargo covers more than two-thirds of the bloc’s oil imports from Russia. The EU’s latest sanctions package also includes a commitment to cut Sberbank, Russia’s largest bank, from SWIFT, the interbank-communications system.

America will not supply Ukraine with rocket systems that could reach into Russia, said President Joe Biden, as his country prepares to send a new military equipment package. Ukrainian officials are pushing for long-range systems that can fire multiple rockets hundreds of miles away. Meanwhile, Britain’s defense ministry said that Russia had suffered devastating losses of lower and mid- ranking troops, which could weaken its forces in the future. It cited “multiple credible reports of localized mutinies” which, along with the inexperience of Russia’s commanders, could sink military morale and discipline.

Annual inflation in Germany reached 7.9% in May, the highest in almost half a century. The country’s statistics agency blamed the war in Ukraine for rising food and energy prices, which are up by 11.1% and 38.3%, respectively, since May 2021. Spain’s year-on-year inflation also increased in May to 8.7%, up from 8.3% in April.

The UN atomic-energy watchdog accused Iran of failing to explain the origins of enriched uranium at three nuclear sites, in a quarterly report seen by several news outlets. Investigators also said the country’s stockpile of enriched uranium had grown to 18 times the limit allowed under the stalled nuclear deal of 2015. Those findings will further complicate efforts to revive the pact.

In Britain, two more Conservative MPs called on the prime minister, Boris Johnson, to resign over the Partygate scandal. Jeremy Wright, a former attorney-general, said the affair has done “lasting damage” to the ruling Conservative party; Elliot Colburn said he was “appaled” by behavior in Downing Street. In all, 26 Tory MPs are now known to have demanded Mr. Johnson’s resignation over the affair. The threshold to trigger a leadership election is 54.

More than 100 people died or went missing in mudslides and large floods following torrential rainfall in Brazil. The bad weather hit Pernambuco, a state in the country’s north-east. Poor urban planning in low-income neighborhoods worsened the impact of the floods. Almost 1,000 people have fled their homes and the government has deployed the army to assist relief efforts.

Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, denied rumors that Vladimir Putin, the president, is ill. There has been speculation that Mr. Putin is suffering from an undisclosed disease, possibly cancer. But Mr Lavrov said that Mr. Putin appears in public regularly and that “no sane” person could see signs of ailment.

Fact of the Day: 21%, the share of the world’s emissions covered by some form of carbon pricing by the end of 2021. 

How war has smashed Ukraine’s second city
Dina Kirsanova, a shopkeeper at a milk kiosk in the north of Kharkiv, saw at least 15 missiles in the sky. Air defenses intercepted most of them, she says, but those that slipped through killed at least nine people. “It’s beyond cruel. There are no military positions here. Just simple people, trying to survive.”

Ukraine’s second city faces renewed attacks as invading Russian forces refocus efforts in the east and north of the country. Just over half of Kharkiv’s 1.5m people have left, says Oleh Synyehubov, the governor. Those who remain are vulnerable to Russian jets, rockets and artillery. Some who escaped earlier have returned to pick up possessions, only to flee again. Mr. Synyehubov fears that the battle for Kharkiv will drag on. “We understand it isn’t a one-month story, and we will need to live within this new reality.”

India’s economy cools down
After a post-covid resurgence in 2021, the recovery in India is slowing. Data for the three months to March 2022, released on Tuesday, are likely to reveal an annual GDP growth rate of 4%. That would be the slowest rate in a year, reflecting Omicron-induced restrictions on activity as well as rising prices.

Prospects have not improved since the end of that quarter. Inflation remains high, driven by soaring commodity prices and supply-chain squeezes, a consequence of the war in Ukraine. To rein in prices, earlier this month the central bank unexpectedly ramped up rates, a shift from its focus on growth in the previous two years. Further rate hikes are expected, but that will dent consumption, the traditional engine of Indian growth. Agriculture, India’s biggest employer, was expected to gain from the war’s disruption to global supply. But production has been scorched by heat waves.

Yet not all the news is gloomy. The economy could still expand by 8% in the 2021-22 financial year. That would leave India the fastest-growing large economy in the world.


The Capitol riot probe’s ticking clock
For nearly a year lawmakers in America’s Democratic-controlled House of Representatives have been investigating the Capitol riot on January 6, 2021. This month they took the aggressive step of subpoenaing some of their own: five Republican congressmen were ordered to testify about their efforts to overturn the election of 2020. None has complied. Kevin McCarthy, the most senior House Republican, is likely to skip his deposition on Tuesday.

The House committee has no easy way of enforcing its subpoenas. But it has gathered copious material from over 1,000 interviews that its members have conducted, including some with talkative former members of the Trump administration. Now its task is to present a cogent narrative of the events leading up to the riot in public hearings that begin in June. After that come the midterm elections in November, when Democrats may well lose control of the House—and with it their chance to seek accountability for that fateful day.

American stocks bounce back
After seven weeks of losses, American stocks were flirting with bear-market territory. But in recent days they appear to have turned a corner. Major indexes closed sharply higher on Friday. By the closing bell on Tuesday the S&P 500’s losses in May may have been entirely wiped out. What’s behind the change in sentiment?

For much of the year rising bond yields were responsible for the tumble in share prices. Investors fretted that higher interest rates would reduce profits, especially those of tech firms with lofty share valuations. Even when yields fell, worries about the war in Ukraine, inflation and the health of the global economy continued to weigh on the stockmarket. Perhaps those concerns have been largely baked in. And investors may have been reassured by the fact that over 75% of the 488 S&P 500 companies that have reported first-quarter results beat expectations. Wall Street has narrowly avoided a bear market, at least for now.

A goldfish is for life, not just for Christmas
After cats and dogs, Britain’s favorite pet is the humble goldfish. With minimal upkeep, goldfish can live for years—often much longer than their owners had bargained for. Unfortunately, when they finally want rid of Goldie or Jaws, some aquarists simply release them into the nearest pond. But as demonstrated by new research in NeoBiota, a journal, this can wreak havoc in ecosystems.

Biologists in Northern Ireland took pet-shop goldfish and compared their appetites with two native freshwater species, by feeding them all the same bloodworms. The domesticated goldfish were by far the most voracious eaters—so much so that the researchers had to quadruple their worm quota. This locust-like guzzling, combined with a fearless nature, have made goldfish, in Britain and around the world, an invasive species which outcompete native fish. The researchers want to phase them out of the pet trade. Or, failing that, to stop owners from relinquishing their charges into the wild.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Which Welsh footballer was transferred to Real Madrid for a world-record fee in 2013?

Tuesday: Which Florida city was the site of the “winter White House” of President Harry Truman?
