The world in brief
May 11, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Inflation in America dipped to 4.9% in April from a year ago, slightly less than most economists had expected. But although much slower than the 9.1% recorded last June, it is still more than double the Federal Reserve’s target of 2%. On May 3rd the Fed announced its tenth consecutive interest rate increase as it attempts to curb price rises.

Palestinian militants fired 270 rockets into Israel from Gaza in retaliation for Israeli air strikes which have killed 21 Palestinians since Tuesday. The exchange marks the heaviest fighting in nine months. Most of the rockets were intercepted or fell into clear areas, while three fell on urban locations. While air-raid sirens sounded in Israel, a state-run Egyptian television channel announced a ceasefire.

George Santos—the American congressman notorious for his lies about his background, the dubious nature of his finances and much else—was released from custody on a $500,000 bond after turning himself in to federal authorities in New York. He pled not guilty to 13 charges, which include wire fraud, money laundering, stealing public funds and lying to the House of Representatives.

Ukraine said it launched a successful counter-attack on the outskirts of Bakhmut, reclaiming about three square miles near the eastern town that has been under heavy fighting for nine months. Yevgeny Prigozhin, the head of the mercenary Wagner Group, confirmed a partial retreat of Russian forces. “The battle for Bakhmut continues,” said the commander of Ukraine’s ground forces.

In Pakistan nearly 1,000 people were arrested and eight killed while protesting against the arrest on Tuesday of Imran Khan, a former prime minister. Mr Khan has been accused of selling official gifts during his time in office, which ended last year. On Wednesday a judge ruled he could be held in custody for eight days. His supporters have gathered in Islamabad, Lahore and other cities.

The activist investor Carl Icahn revealed that his holding company, Icahn Enterprises, was under investigation by federal prosecutors in New York. His firm was accused on May 2nd by Hindenburg Research, a short-seller, of operating a “Ponzi-like” structure (the company said the critiques were “flawed”). The firm’s share price has fallen by more than a third since Hindenburg’s report.

Britain’s government backtracked on a Brexit pledge to scrap by December all 4,000 laws which are derived from EU legislation. Instead it will focus on just 600. The U-turn will be made via an amendment to the Retained EU Law Bill currently passing through Parliament. Since leaving the bloc at the end of 2020 Britain has repealed 1,000 EU regulations.

Fact of the day: 36.4%, Pakistan’s annual inflation rate in April. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Migrants at America’s southern border
Few policies have been endorsed by both Donald Trump and Joe Biden. But upon taking office Mr Biden kept in place Title 42, a public-health rule enacted by Mr Trump in March 2020 which allowed the government to rapidly expel migrants who entered without authorisation. The policy was ostensibly put in place to prevent the spread of covid-19. Title 42 has since been used to deport 2.7m migrants (although many of those expelled have tried to enter again).

Thursday marks the end of the covid-19 emergency period and, with it, Title 42. Officials anticipate a surge of border crossings. Thousands of migrants are already on the move; many have been waiting in northern Mexico for the policy to lapse.

The Biden administration is expanding legal pathways into America while cracking down on illegal entry. But the system may be overwhelmed by huge numbers of migrants. Only Congress can allocate more resources to processing migrants and asylum claims, but the current political gridlock makes that improbable.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China’s riskily low inflation
China has avoided the inflation scourge that afflicted so many other countries after the pandemic. “All other central banks would indeed be very happy to have your…inflation record,” China’s central-bank chief was told on a recent visit to America. But could the country now face the opposite problem?

Figures released on Thursday could show inflation falling to just 0.2% year-on-year in April. “Factory-gate” inflation (covering the prices paid by firms to other producers) is already in negative territory. Although low inflation makes central bankers happy, outright deflation makes them very nervous.

Fortunately, China should avoid that fate. Fuel prices were unusually high a year ago, making today’s prices look weak by comparison. Credit is also picking up. As China’s recovery proceeds, factories will run hotter and shops will fill. That will put upward pressure on prices—as long as fears of deflation do not undermine the very recovery that would best avert it.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
SoftBank’s punts on Alibaba and Arm
On Thursday SoftBank Group, a Japanese investment powerhouse, will report its results for the year to the end of March. It will be a chance for the market to see how much damage a new world of higher interest rates and lower tech valuations has inflicted on one of the most prominent growth investors.

In 2000 SoftBank invested $20m in Alibaba, a Chinese tech firm. Alibaba’s value subsequently rose to hundreds of billions of dollars; in 2014 SoftBank owned a third of it. That provided a long-term windfall—but now that SoftBank has reportedly sold most of its stake, one that is now all but exhausted.

Investors are now looking for updates on SoftBank’s strategy for Arm, a British chip designer it bought in 2016. In March SoftBank announced plans to list Arm in New York. A successful IPO would offer a funding boost now that the Alibaba cash cow has been milked.


A library of human genome sequences
Genetically, human beings are remarkably similar. Some 99.6% of your genome—the unique string of DNA located in most of your body’s cells—can be found in every other person. Even the remaining differences are common: more than 95% will be shared by tens of millions of others.

But tiny variations can have important consequences for susceptibility to disease. So a well-stocked genomic “library” can be used by scientists to study different genetic identities. Such research can also help patients to better understand the function of their genes and demand better treatment. As a new paper in Nature reports, an international consortium of researchers has now created such a “pangenome”.

Each genome was painstakingly assembled from DNA fragments taken from blood samples. A digital file now contains the genome sequences of 47 people. Some 300 more will be added, including from underrepresented regions such as the Middle East. More genetic diversity will allow scientists to better understand how mutations arise across space as well as time.


PHOTO: MARTIN PARR/MAGNUM PHOTOS
Martin Parr at Photo London
Photo London, an exhibition featuring dozens of galleries from around the world, opens on Thursday at Somerset House, a gallery in the British capital. Each year the show crowns a “Master of Photography”; this year’s winner is Martin Parr, a British photographer known, among other things, for candid shots of his country’s often bleak seaside.

One of Mr Parr’s lifelong obsessions has been capturing “people on the beach in the rain”. Swimmers queue to lurch into an icy pool; a family sits in deckchairs to watch a steam fair; old men soak up the sun; and a family picnics in the drizzle under a halo of umbrellas.

Mr Parr says he uses photography to express his love-hate relationship with his homeland. He was upset by Brexit, he says, and the intolerance he sometimes witnesses among his compatriots depresses him. Photography is his therapy. “Most of the pictures I take are failures,” says Mr Parr. “You need the bad pictures to understand the good ones.”


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which historically important geographic formation spans from Alexandria in the west to Port Said in the east?

Wednesday: What pejorative term was given to the German politicians who signed the armistice at the end of the first world war?

I believe in the dollar. Everything I earn, I spend.

Joan Crawford
