The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Apil 19, 2023

Dominion Voting Systems agreed to settle its defamation lawsuit against Fox News for $787.5m, about half of what it had initially sought in damages. The deal came just as opening arguments were due to start in a closely-watched trial in Delaware. Dominion, a voting-technology firm, had alleged that Fox defamed it by promoting the lie that Dominion’s machines helped throw America’s 2020 election for President Joe Biden.

China’s economy grew by 4.5% year-on-year in the first quarter of 2023, a faster pace than many analysts expected. The ending of strict covid rules in December has boosted business and the economy. GDP grew by 2.9% in the previous quarter and by 3% in 2022. The government has set a growth target of 5% for this year.

Goldman Sachs reported first-quarter profits of $3.2bn, a 18% fall compared with a year earlier. The Wall Street icon was hit by a failed attempt to build a big consumer bank and a slowdown in dealmaking last year; it lost around $200m in the market turmoil following the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank. In January Goldman announced it would fire 3,000 employees.

A fire at a hospital in the Chinese capital killed at least 21 people in what appeared to be Beijing’s deadliest blaze in the past two decades. The fire was reported by state media—though only hours after it was extinguished. The Chinese Communist Party keeps a tight lid on unflattering news and information.

Sudan’s ruling military junta and the Rapid Support Forces, a militia, accused each other of violating a 24-hour “ceasefire” that was meant to begin on Tuesday evening. The two forces have been fighting for four days, leaving at least 185 civilians killed and more than 1,800 injured. Water and power were cut off with many hospitals out of service in Khartoum, the capital.

A Russian court rejected an appeal by the lawyers of Evan Gershkovich for the American journalist to be released on bail or house arrest ahead of his trial. Mr Gershkovich was arrested last month on espionage charges when reporting for the Wall Street Journal in Yekaterinburg, a city east of Moscow. America’s government has declared that Mr Gershkovich is “wrongfully detained”.

J-Hope became the second member of BTS, the world’s biggest boy band, to begin military service. South Korea requires most men to serve at least 18 months in the armed forces. J-Hope probably could have avoided joining up thanks to his megastardom. But, like Elvis Presley in 1958, he probably decided dodging the draft would not endear him to his fans—known as the “ARMY”.

Fact of the day: 20 years, the average length of ongoing conflicts in 2021, up from 13 years in the mid-1980s. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
India considers same-sex marriage
In 2018 India’s Supreme Court handed down a landmark judgment. Arguing that a colonial-era law banning sex between men violated the constitution, it legalised same-sex relationships in the country. This week it is hearing the final arguments in a case that may result in another historic judgment, based on a raft of petitions asking for the legal recognition of same-sex marriage.

The deliberations pit the court, which has indicated its support for expanding gay rights, against the government, which says that the demands to give same-sex couples the right to marry reflects “urban elitist views” at odds with Indian culture. The government also maintains that legalisation is a matter for parliament rather than the courts.

Polls suggest most Indians still oppose same-sex marriage, though acceptance of gay relationships is slowly becoming more widespread. If the petitioners prevail, India’s law would be among the most progressive in the region; Taiwan, for instance, allowed same-sex couples to marry in 2019.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Snapchat tries to snap up users
No social-media company has been hit as hard by the recent tech crunch as Snap. The Los Angeles-based firm, which runs the Snapchat messaging app, has lost nearly 90% of its market value since its peak in 2021. Apple’s tighter restrictions on tracking users’ behaviour have made it harder for companies to show relevant ads on their apps. Meanwhile TikTok has come for Snapchat’s 20-something viewers and creators.

On Wednesday at its annual “partner summit” Snap will try to tempt them back. Expect updates on the company’s new artificial-intelligence-powered chatbot, incentives to lure back creators, and new tricks with augmented-reality lenses (the filters that put you in a virtual Prada dress or turn you into a hamster). Snap faces an uphill struggle. But with TikTok facing a possible ban, Facebook turning into an online retirement home and Twitter under erratic new management, Snap will seldom have a better opportunity than it does right now.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Free speech and threats at SCOTUS
On Wednesday the Supreme Court of the United States will consider “true threats”, one of the few categories of expression that fall outside the protection of the First Amendment. The case, Counterman v the state of Colorado, concerns a barrage of strange and unwanted messages (including “Fuck off permanently” and “Was that you in the white jeep?”) that Billy Raymond Counterman sent to Coles Whalen, a musician, on Facebook over several years.

The missives terrified Ms Whalen and caused her to cancel shows, according to her lawyers. Mr Counterman was later convicted for violating Colorado’s anti-stalking laws. But Mr Counterman’s lawyer insists his client, who has a mental illness, never meant to be menacing and warns that innocent expression stands to be criminalised if the authorities can charge people for expression delivered without hostile intent. The lawyers for Colorado counter that such messages cause harm “no matter what the person making the threat had in mind”. The Court must decide whether a person’s words can be separated from their intentions.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Tesla keeps its foot on the accelerator
Elon Musk, the world’s second-richest man, is hoping to launch the most powerful rocket ever built this week (see next story). But investors on Earth are focused on Tesla, the electric carmaker Mr Musk runs and which announces first-quarter results on Wednesday. Tesla is trying to maintain speed amid an inflation-fuelled slowdown in consumer spending. It has cut prices five times this year in America, its biggest market, and is also slashing prices in China, its second biggest. That will dent profitability—analysts are forecasting gross margins of 21% for the first quarter, down from 29% the year before.

Still, that is nothing to scoff at—rivals Ford and General Motors are expected to clock in at 16%. A fall in the price of lithium, a key component in electric batteries, should also put some wind at Tesla’s back. Investors are used to a bumpy ride—after Tesla’s market value fell by around $672bn (or roughly two-thirds) during 2022, it has gained $204bn back since January.


PHOTO: REUTERS
The first launch of a new space age
Rocket-watchers this week are looking towards the Gulf Coast of Texas—where SpaceX intends to fire its Starship system into the sky. The launch, initially scheduled for Monday, was postponed due to a frozen valve. A second attempt is expected on Thursday.

SpaceX’s system combines its “Super Heavy” rocket with a prototype of the Starship spacecraft. If the launch is successful, the most powerful rocket ever built will put into orbit the largest spacecraft to be carried in a single launch since the space shuttle. The Starship system could begin a new space age in which large spacecraft take off, land and take off again. That will allow SpaceX, which already dominates the satellite-launch business, to put into orbit more and bigger satellites than ever before. Elon Musk, SpaceX’s boss, also wants it to take crews to the Moon and Mars. But much more work is needed. The process for landing has not been tested; those needed for flight beyond Earth orbit are further off still.



Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which TV channel runs an annual “Shark Week”?

Tuesday: What type of tank has the British government sent to Ukraine?

A Conservative Government is an organised hypocrisy.

Benjamin Disraeli
