The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 2 hours ago (22:09 GMT+1 / 05:09 Hong Kong)

Public funeral events for Elizabeth II concluded with a service at Windsor Castle, where the queen was buried in a private ceremony. A state funeral took place on Monday morning at Westminster Abbey, attended by Joe Biden, Emmanuel Macron and around 500 other foreign dignitaries. The ceremonies, which drew large crowds of mourners, mark the end of ten days of national mourning.

A Russian missile struck a Ukrainian nuclear plant on Monday, landing around 300m away from the reactors, according to Ukrainian authorities. The head of Energoatom, the national nuclear energy firm, described the attack on Pivdennoukrainsk station in the country’s southern Mykolaiv region as “nuclear terrorism”. Separately, the Kremlin denied having committed war crimes in the eastern Kharkiv region, where a Ukrainian counter-offensive has uncovered mass graves with bodies carrying evidence of torture.

Hurricane Fiona made landfall in the Dominican Republic. Torrential rain and winds of 90mph triggered mudslides that forced roads and businesses to close in the east of the Caribbean country. Damage to aqueducts has left over 1m people without running water. Over the weekend the storm battered neighbouring Puerto Rico, killing several people and cutting off power to 1.3m residents.

The Taliban exchanged Mark Frerichs, an American engineer, for Bashir Noorzai, an Afghan tribal leader with connections to the terrorist group. Mr Noorzai helped finance the Taliban in the 1990s and was arrested in 2005 for running one of the world’s largest drug-smuggling operations. Mr Frerichs, who had been working in Afghanistan as a contractor, was abducted by the Taliban in February 2020.

Russia and China agreed to carry out more joint military exercises and strengthen their defence co-operation after a meeting between officials on Monday. Yang Jiechi, China’s top diplomat, hosted Nikolai Patrushev, the head of Russia’s security council, in south-eastern Fujian province. Despite recent disagreements between the two countries over Russia’s botched invasion of Ukraine, the Chinese foreign ministry re-affirmed that they “always firmly support each other on issues concerning each other’s core interests.”

Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland have banned Russian travellers from crossing their borders as of Monday to press Russia to reverse its invasion of Ukraine. Exceptions include those travelling on humanitarian grounds, dissidents and family members of EU citizens. Finland, which also shares a border with Russia, has reduced the number of tourist visas to a tenth of its current total but decided against a ban.

A judge in Baltimore overturned the murder conviction of Adnan Syed, freeing him after he had served more than 20 years of a life sentence for the killing of his former girlfriend, Hae Min Lee, in 1999. Mr Syed’s case was thrown back into the spotlight in 2014 by the award-winning true-crime podcast “Serial”, which raised questions over his guilt and the conduct of his lawyer. Prosecutors in Maryland must now decide whether to pursue a new trial or drop the charges altogether.

Fact of the day: 94%, the debt-to-GDP ratio of Egypt. Read the full story.

World leaders assemble at the UN

PHOTO: AFP VIA GETTY IMAGES
A day after one gathering of world leaders in London, at Elizabeth II’s funeral, another gets under way in New York on Tuesday, at the UN General Assembly. The leaders’ annual debate will resume fully in person, after two years of covid-related disruption. But the war in Ukraine, the energy crisis and climate-related disasters mean this will hardly be a happy reunion.

Joe Biden will address the assembly on Wednesday. In 2019 Donald Trump told the UN that “the future does not belong to globalists”. Last year Mr Biden reassured fellow leaders that America was “back at the table in international forums”. But since then divisions between the great powers have deepened; last week Mr Biden felt compelled to warn Vladimir Putin against using chemical or nuclear weapons in Ukraine. And the ravages of the pandemic have held back progress in health, education and standards of living for two consecutive years, playing havoc with the UN’s agenda—not least its sustainable-development goals.

Japan keeps cool on inflation

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Tuesday Japan is set to overshoot its official inflation target for the fifth month in a row. The growth in core consumer prices, which exclude fresh food, is expected to approach 3% year-on-year in August; the Bank of Japan’s target is 2%. Yet the central bank reckons demand is still too weak, and wage growth too slow, to worry excessively about sustained inflation. Kuroda Haruhiko, the governor, has signalled that the bank will maintain its loose monetary stance at its policy meeting later this week.

If so, that will leave the BoJ even further out of step with other rich-world central banks. Most of them are racing to tighten policy in the face of stubbornly high inflation. The growing gap in yields is one reason why the Japanese yen has fallen below 140 per US dollar, its lowest rate in more than two decades. Expect even more of a tumble.

Legal weed struggles to turn a profit

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Canada legalised recreational marijuana in 2018 in the hope that a thriving cannabis industry would replace drug-smuggling gangs. Better quality-control and labelling of doses were to make for safer highs. Prices of regulated and unregulated marijuana in Canada are slowly converging. But black-market suppliers, who neither pay taxes nor abide by stringent regulations, have retained their edge: cost remains the single most important factor in choosing a source for most buyers.

That is an issue for Aurora Cannabis, one of Canada’s largest pot producers, which is expected to report more losses on Tuesday. Since March 2019 the company’s share price has tumbled from more than C$150 (US$113) to below C$2. Investors will be inspecting the company’s decision last month to buy Bevo Farms, a producer of vegetables and houseplants. And sentiment around legal cannabis will largely depend on regulators: as America’s senate backtracks on a bill to decriminalise cannabis, Germany—with a potential market estimated at $16.6bn—is mulling legalisation.

Argentina’s economy grows amid woes

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Tuesday Argentina is expected to report that its economy expanded by more than 6% in the second quarter of the year. The war in Ukraine has pushed up prices for soy and wheat, both of which the country has in bountiful supply. But other woes are abundant in South America’s second-largest economy: annual inflation could reach 100% by the end of the year. The country owes the IMF more than $40bn, but has scarce foreign reserves. In July Argentina’s economy minister resigned, citing political infighting among his superiors. His replacement was sacked three weeks into the job.

But the latest incumbent, Sergio Massa, has offered more hope since taking over in August. An experienced operator, Mr Massa promises to reduce the fiscal deficit, as agreed with the IMF, and to stop the money-printing that has fuelled inflation. Yet with pressure from some in government to increase welfare spending, Mr Massa faces a difficult balancing act.

50 years on, “The Joy of Sex” endures

PHOTO: NILS JORGENSEN/SHUTTERSTOCK
When Alex Comfort first published his famous sex manual in 1972, its success stemmed from its reassuring tone: “The Joy of Sex” counselled that there was nothing deviant about desire. At a time when sex was widely considered sinful in the Anglophone world, “The Joy of Sex” stood apart for its relaxed, approachable prose and its emphasis on pleasure. Mr Comfort wanted to do for sex what “The Joy of Cooking” had done for food: teach readers about the basics, and provide a “gourmet guide” for those seeking further satisfaction. (Try bondage, he suggested, a “wild sexual sensation”.)

Though groundbreaking for its time, parts of the book may now seem nauseating. “Don’t get yourself raped,” he advised his female audience. A revised edition has since omitted some offensive references, but the core of the book has endured. Good sex was not possible without love, Mr Comfort argued, and that meant “mutual tenderness, respect and consideration”. That is still a recipe worth learning.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: What in maths is defined as “the number of different digits that a system of counting uses to represent numbers”?

Monday: Atlas, Luna and Madagascan sunset are all types of what creature?

For poetry there exists neither large countries nor small. Its domain is in the heart of all men.

Giorgos Seferis