The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (23:49 GMT+1 / 06:49 Hong Kong)

America urged its citizens to leave Ukraine, saying it believes Russia will step up strikes against civilian infrastructure and government facilities in the coming days. The statement from the American embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, follows a Ukrainian government ban on public celebrations of the country’s independence day on Wednesday. That day will also mark six months since Russia’s invasion.

America’s private-sector activity contracted for a second month in August, according to S&P Global’s flash survey of purchasing managers. The service sector recorded a steeper rate of decline than industry as inflation choked demand. The dollar and short-dated US government bond yields reversed their recent climb amid fresh concerns about America’s economy.

Twitter’s former head of security, Peiter Zatko, accused the company of failing to protect user data and lying about its security problems, according to Whistleblower Aid, the organisation that helped file his complaint to regulators. The accusation comes ahead of a court battle in October between Twitter and Elon Musk, a tech billionaire, over a failed deal to buy the social media platform for $44bn.

Malaysia’s Federal Court upheld the conviction of Najib Razak, the former prime minister, on charges related to a multi-billion dollar corruption scandal at 1Malaysia Development Berhad, a state fund. Mr Najib was found guilty in July 2020 of illegally receiving about $10m from a former unit of 1MDB, charges that he denies. He was sentenced to 12 years in jail and a 210m ringgit ($46.8m) fine.

America’s National Archives recovered 700 pages of classified material from Donald Trump’s Florida home in January, according to a letter from the agency to the former president’s lawyer. These included documents “at the highest levels of classification”, more of which were seized by the FBI this month. Mr Trump is suing the Department of Justice over an investigation into the confidential documents: he wants a third-party “special master” to review the evidence and the FBI to return some items removed during the raid, which he has called politically motivated.

A former police officer in Kentucky pleaded guilty to helping falsify a search warrant for a raid that resulted in the death of Breonna Taylor, a black medical technician, in 2020. Kelly Goodlett is also accused of covering up the falsification immediately after the botched no-knock operation, in which Taylor was shot six times. Her death, along with that of George Floyd, sparked mass protests over police violence against black Americans. Three other Louisville police officers face charges connected to the incident.

Australia’s government will allow the construction of a fertiliser plant near an important Aboriginal heritage site on Western Australia’s Burrup peninsula. Some of the rock carvings, which include what are thought to be the oldest images of a human face, can now be moved to allow for construction. The plant’s backers, Perdaman Industries, said the A$4.5bn (US$3.1bn) urea plant will create 2,000 local jobs.

Fact of the day: 2.9, the number of children the average Israeli woman has; her British and French peers have 1.6 and 1.8 respectively. Read the full story.

Six months of Russia’s war in Ukraine

PHOTO: REUTERS
Wednesday marks the six-month anniversary of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Russia has failed to meet any of its military objectives: conquering Kyiv, the capital, capturing the eastern Donbas region or seizing Ukraine’s coastline. Around 15,000 Russians have been killed, according to the Pentagon, roughly the same number that died in the Soviet Union’s decade-long occupation of Afghanistan. The frontlines have barely moved in recent weeks, though Ukraine hopes to push Russian troops out of Kherson, a city in the south, in the coming months. Both armies are exhausted.

The Kremlin’s gamble is that American and European support for Ukraine will fall away over the winter, as spiralling gas prices pile on domestic pressures. That, in turn, could pave the way for a deal that leaves perhaps one-fifth of the country in Russian hands. Ukraine, unwilling to see its dismemberment, will hit back with rocket strikes and partisan activity. No one thinks the war will be over by Christmas.

Our revised Ukraine hub collates the best of our coverage of the war over the last six months. Our new leader reflects on a war where almost nothing is as it seems.

Chipping at Nvidia’s bottom line

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Nvidia, one of the world’s leading chip companies, reports its financial results on Wednesday. They will be dire. So bad, in fact, that the firm offered a preview earlier this month, hoping to dampen the shock to the markets. The Californian company said it expected to book revenues of $6.7bn in the second financial quarter, down by 19% from the same period last year and 17% lower than the $8.1bn it had forecast in May.

The culprit is weaker post-pandemic demand for electronics, especially high-end gaming systems, for which Nvidia supplies powerful graphics chips. Many of those cards had also been used to mine cryptocurrencies, but the crypto meltdown has sapped demand here too. Nvidia’s rivals—Intel, Qualcomm and AMD—have also missed revenue forecasts. On his earnings call Jensen Huang, Nvidia’s CEO, will be trying hard to show investors a path back to growth.

Oil and toil: elections in Angola

PHOTO: REUTERS
For nearly three decades the People’s Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA), Angola’s ruling party, fought an on-off civil war with the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA). The MPLA won in 2002, ushering in a period of peace and multi-party democracy. On Wednesday the southern African country will hold its fifth general election. There are few other reasons to celebrate, though. President João Lourenço, who replaced José Eduardo dos Santos in 2017 on pledges to cut back graft and reform the economy, has disappointed.

Angolans are frustrated that their oil-dependent state serves only a small elite, leaving the majority in poverty. Such sentiment has bolstered support for UNITA. Yet the MPLA has used its hold on the state apparatus to hound its old foe, in the courts and beyond. This paranoid party, dominated by securocrats, looks set to remain in power, spouting revolutionary rhetoric while gorging on the fruits of crony capitalism.

Britain reins in the hosepipes

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Britain, like much of the world, is parched. July this year was the driest since 1935. On Wednesday Thames Water, London’s main water utility, will impose a hosepipe ban on its 15m customers, to curtail the cleaning of cars, filling of pools and watering of gardens. Other water companies across southern England and Wales have already taken similar steps.

Water firms reckon such measures typically cut usage by around 10%. But evidence suggests that the less radical measure of simply informing people about their water consumption could help more. Almost half of respondents to a survey in 2020 said they used less than 20 litres a day. The true figure is closer to 150 litres. Water meters typically reduce usage by around 15%, but are deployed in only 60% of British homes. They can help identify leaks, too. Nearly one-fifth of Britain’s drinking water is lost to burst pipes, which become more frequent in extreme heat.


Welsh football goes to Hollywood

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
It was the kind of change of fate that usually only strikes in films. In September 2020 Ryan Reynolds, star of “Deadpool”, and Rob McElhenney, the creator of “It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia”, a sitcom, announced their intention to buy Wrexham FC. The club, the oldest in Wales, was languishing in the fifth tier of Britain’s football leagues. The Hollywood actors were not lifelong footie fans. They had no experience running such an institution. “We had no direct connection,” Mr McElhenney told a supporter. “It was just a feeling.” Mr McElhenney also said that Wrexham reminded him of the working-class Philadelphia of his childhood.

Naturally, the pair brought along a camera crew to chart the ups and downs of their inaugural season. On Wednesday “Welcome to Wrexham”, the resulting docuseries, premieres in America on FX; one day later it will be released in Britain on Disney+. The series is poignant, and often funny. Wrexham’s fans and staff have high hopes for their club under its new management. Mr Reynolds, too, hopes it will triumph on the field. “It’s an underdog story,” he says. And it still is: since the takeover, Wrexham have remained in the fifth tier.

Daily quiz

Quiz: Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Who was the British foreign secretary during the 2003 Iraq war?

Tuesday: What was the traditional nickname for IBM, based on its logo?

To die for a religion is easier than to live it absolutely.

Jorge Luis Borges
