The world in brief
May 2, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

American regulators shut down First Republic, a San Francisco-based lender, after a run on its deposits that followed the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank. JPMorgan Chase, the world’s biggest bank by market capitalisation, agreed to take over First Republic’s deposits, worth around $93bn, as well as most of the bank’s roughly $200bn in assets. First Republic is the second-largest American bank, as measured by assets, to fail.

Sudan’s air force struck targets in Khartoum, the country’s capital, as the latest ceasefire, which began on Thursday, collapsed. Heavy street fighting also resumed in the city. The trouble has now spread to the region of Darfur, where attacks on civilians were reported. Across the country more than 500 people have been killed during two weeks of fighting.

Janet Yellen warned that America’s treasury department may not be able to pay its bills by June 1st unless the debt limit is raised—earlier than the previous forecast by several weeks. That gives the Biden administration and congressional Republicans a month to reach a deal. Republicans have proposed increasing the borrowing cap by a year in exchange for spending cuts, a non-starter with Democrats.

America estimated that Russia has suffered 100,000 casualties in Ukraine since December, suggesting that Russia’s casualty rate has accelerated in recent months. America believes that of the more than 20,000 Russians killed, nearly half are recruits from the mercenary Wagner Group. Earlier Russian missile strikes wounded more than 30 people and damaged dozens of homes in Pavlohrad, a city in eastern Ukraine.

Lordstown Motors, an American carmaker, shed more than a fifth in market value after reporting that Foxconn, a Taiwanese electronics manufacturer, wants to cancel an investment of up to $170m. Losing that infusion could put Lordstown into bankruptcy, warned the firm. Foxconn reportedly wants out because Lordstown risks being delisted by Nasdaq since its shares have traded below $1 for too long.

Cuba’s government cancelled the May Day parade traditionally held in Revolution Square on International Workers’ Day, blaming a shortage of the fuel needed to bus hundreds of thousands of attendees to the capital Havana. American sanctions and falling imports from Venezuela have left the island so short of petrol that some drivers queue for days to fill up their cars.

Bruno Le Maire, France’s finance minister who moonlights as a novelist, caused a stir over an erotic passage in his most recent book. The novel contains a brief, explicit sex scene. An opposition lawmaker asked how Mr Le Maire could spare “a minute, an hour, a week of his time” to such pursuits amid the fight against inflation.

Fact of the day: 35%, the proportion of Americans who believe that companies’ profit-seeking is the main cause of inflation. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Britain’s nurses air more grievances
The NHS staff council, which represents unions in England’s National Health Service, meets on Tuesday to decide on a deal to raise most staff salaries by 5%. The offer, made by the government, was rejected by members of the Royal College of Nursing, the main nursing union. But they are likely to find themselves outvoted by other unions.

For months much of the NHS has been striking over pay. The nurses’ dispute, though, has escalated recently. RCN members—including for the first time some working in cancer and emergency services—returned to picket lines in England on Sunday. The walkout, which runs until midnight on Monday, is 24 hours shorter than planned: the RCN did not properly account for the expiry of its own strike mandate. The government took the nurses to court, which declared action on Tuesday illegal. The RCN is undeterred. Even if the council decides to implement the pay increase, the body says it will continue striking once its members give it a new mandate.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Difficult decision-making in the euro zone
For years the European Central Bank used “forward guidance” to steer market expectations of its next moves. But now inflation and economic data are so volatile that it does not dare. Instead, the bank’s policy setting is heavily dependent on the newest information. Two important data releases are due on Tuesday: the bank-lending survey for the first quarter of 2023, and the inflation figures from April.

The former tracks credit standards and demand for loans, which will help show whether the ECB’s tight monetary policy is restraining economic growth. Credit standards were already getting tougher in the last quarter of 2022 and loan demand fell. If that decline continued in the first quarter of 2023, policymakers might consider slowing down the pace of interest-rate increases. But annual inflation probably remained high in April. In Germany it declined slightly from 7.8% to 7.6%, but in France it increased from 6.7% to 6.9%. Data-dependent policy is tricky when the data point in different directions.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Senate ponders ethics at SCOTUS
On Tuesday the Senate Judiciary Committee holds a hearing over conduct in the Supreme Court. Calls for more accountability have followed recent revelations of justices’ questionable behaviour—particularly the news that Justice Clarence Thomas had undisclosed financial links to Harlan Crow, a major Republican donor. Justice Thomas has done real-estate deals with Mr Crow, who also treated him over two decades to holidays worth millions of dollars.

The hearing will proceed without Chief Justice John Roberts, who declined an invitation from Senator Dick Durbin, the committee’s chairman. Instead the chief justice submitted a “Statement on Ethics Principles and Practices”, signed by all nine justices and detailing how they deal with ethical issues. It did not satisfy their critics: Fix the Court, a watchdog, called the reply “anaemic”. Angus King, an independent senator from Maine, says a bipartisan bill he introduced last week—requiring the Court to adopt a code of conduct—would “help the court help itself” and reverse a “drastic decline in public confidence”.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
HSBC braces for a tough few days
This will be a big and nerve-wracking week for HSBC. The London-listed bank reports its first-quarter earnings on Tuesday—but the main event will be its annual general meeting on Friday. Ping An, a Chinese insurer and HSBC’s largest shareholder (with a stake of around 8%), will probably take the opportunity to give the bank a dressing down. It has for some time been privately urging HSBC’s board to spin off its Asian business. Last year the insurer took its campaign public, and in April published a 2,200-word statement criticising HSBC’s management.

Ping An’s numerous complaints range from lacklustre performance to inadequate cost-cutting. But its biggest gripe is that the board has “drained HSBC Asia of dividends and growth capital” to support less promising parts of the business. (Falling group-level dividends have also annoyed shareholders.) An unrepentant board is unlikely to concede to Ping An’s demands any time soon. The sniping is bound to get worse.


PHOTO: MICHAEL CHYLINSKI/MODERN TINTYPE
Why we love bad films
Bad novels and bad plays tend to be swiftly forgotten, but bad films live on. There are festivals and podcasts devoted to guffawing at duds like “Plan 9 From Outer Space”, a 1950s sci-fi flick dubbed the “worst film ever made”, or “Showgirls”, a widely-panned erotic thriller released in 1995. And now there is a sardonic book on the subject: “Junk Film: Why Bad Movies Matter”, by Katharine Coldiron, which is published on Tuesday.

Ms Coldiron argues that a terrible film functions as its own behind-the-scenes documentary. Rather than responding to the story, the audience marvels at the eccentric decisions made by the cast and crew. Because viewers are not in the same room with the creators, as they would be at a play or concert, they can laugh without embarrassment at their folly. And perhaps that folly deserves respect: Ms Coldiron and her fellow bad-film buffs see the worst directors as mavericks true to their artistic vision, no matter how ridiculous it is.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: What word can mean both “the appearance of double images on a TV screen” and “the sudden and unexplained ceasing of communication”?

Monday: Which children’s television character was assisted by Lofty, Dizzy and Scoop?

You know more than you think you do.

Benjamin Spock