The world in brief
August 12, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Merrick Garland, America’s attorney-general, appointed a special counsel to oversee the investigation into Hunter Biden, the president’s son. Mr Garland elevated David Weiss, a federal prosecutor in Delaware who has been leading the yearslong inquiry, to the role, which comes with greater independence. Hunter Biden earlier pleaded not guilty to federal charges after a judge raised concerns about a deal he had reached with prosecutors. With the deal dead, Mr Weiss sought to dismiss the tax charges in Delaware in order to move them to a new jurisdiction and bring the case to trial.

President Joe Biden signed a disaster declaration approving federal aid to Hawaii, where wildfires killed at least 55 people. Flames, fanned by the winds of a distant hurricane, devastated parts of Maui. Lahaina, a tourist town, was largely destroyed. Hundreds of people are still missing; many fled the smoke by jumping into the ocean.

A judge ordered Sam Bankman-Fried to jail, revoking his bail. The founder of FTX, a failed cryptocurrency exchange, was arrested on fraud charges after the firm collapsed last year. The judge’s decision came after prosecutors argued in a hearing that Mr Bankman-Fried tried to intimidate several witnesses including his ex-girlfriend, a star witness in the case against him, whose private writings he showed reporters.

Britain evacuated 39 asylum seekers from the Bibby Stockholm, a barge, after bacteria causing Legionnaires’ disease (a nasty kind of pneumonia) was found in its water systems. The boat was intended to fit 500 migrants. Britain’s government wants to deter asylum seekers from crossing to its shores in small boats. Some 51,000 of them are being housed in hotels, at a daily cost of £6m ($7.6m).

Global oil demand reached a record high of 103m barrels per day in June, according to the International Energy Agency, an official forecaster. The surge came from increased oil use in power generation, and rebounding air travel during the summer months. The IEA reckons that crude prices will continue to rise as OPEC+, the world’s largest oil cartel and allies, cuts production.

At least 23 Rohingyas are dead and 30 missing after their boat sank off the coast of Myanmar. The vessel, which was bound for Malaysia, capsized in bad weather and was abandoned by its crew on Sunday. There were only eight survivors. The Rohingyas—a Muslim minority group from Myanmar—have long fled persecution. They are now largely confined to refugee camps in Bangladesh.

Scientists in Egypt discovered a previously unknown species of whale in the Fayoum Oasis, south-west of Cairo, the capital. The 41m-year-old find belongs to the Basilosaurids family of extinct cetaceans. It is the oldest-known whale group to have lived exclusively in water (early ancestors of the ocean’s biggest animals once walked on land). Scientists named the new discovery Tutcetus rayanensis, after Tutankhamun, the Egyptian boy king.

Word of the week: japa, a Yoruba verb meaning to run, flee or escape. It is currently a buzzword in Nigeria. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
China’s new row with America over Taiwan
Taiwan’s vice-president, William Lai Ching-te, is stopping over briefly in New York on Saturday en route to Paraguay for the inauguration of President Santiago Peña Palacios. America has no official relations with Taiwan (only 13 countries, including Paraguay, do), so such stopovers are an important way for Taiwan to cultivate its most important international protector. In March, the president, Tsai Ing-wen, stopped in New York en route to Guatemala.

Leaders in Beijing will be mulling their response to America’s latest “provocation”. China particularly dislikes Mr Lai, seeing him as a diehard supporter of Taiwan’s formal independence from China. It fears that America is backing Mr Lai in next year’s presidential election, when he will be the ruling party’s candidate. China’s ambassador in America has already likened the trip to “a grey rhino charging at us”. Expect a response that edges towards the more bellicose end of a spectrum that ranges from fierce warnings to large-scale military exercises.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
State elections test Malaysia’s unity government
After years as Malaysia’s prime-minister-in-waiting, Anwar Ibrahim finally got the job in 2022. Doing so required an awkward alliance with an old political rival, Barisan Nasional, the coalition that ruled Malaysia for 61 years until 2018. On Saturday the new government, Pakatan Harapan (or Alliance of Hope), faces its first electoral test, as six out of 13 states go to the polls.

Three—Kedah, Kelantan and Terengganu—are poor Malay heartlands ruled by Parti Islam Se-Malaysia (PAS) of the opposition coalition. In the last general election, the Islamist party won the most seats. That result was driven by a campaign of religious populism, which resonated with many in the Muslim-majority country. PAS also enjoyed a big share of the youth vote.

Many young Malaysians are disillusioned with the old guard, including Mr Anwar. The state elections are unlikely to topple the eight-month-old government, but the results could be a sobering warning for Mr Anwar: staying in the top job may be as tricky as getting it.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Britain’s rural culture wars
In Britain, Saturday is the “Glorious Twelfth”, the traditional opening of the country’s red-grouse shooting season. Weeks before the first shot was fired, however, a different target presented itself. United Utilities, a water company, leases out some of its 56,000 hectares of moorland to shooters, but recently announced that it would not renew these licences.

UU says it took the decision for the sake of water quality. Anti-shooting campaigners have long argued that the sport degrades the environment. Gamekeepers often set fire to heather-covered moorlands, so that grouse can feed on younger and more nutritious plants. That can damage peatlands, acidify rivers and reduce biodiversity. Lead shot, still commonly used despite a voluntary phase-out, also poisons wildlife.

Last year UU was named Britain’s most polluting water firm, in part for releasing raw sewage into rivers. A powerful lobby for rural causes slammed the company’s recent move as a “distraction technique”. The rural culture wars are racing to a new front.


PHOTO: AP
Are the kids all right?
On Saturday, the UN’s International Youth Day will offer guidance for young people looking to contribute to the green transition. Gen Z (born between the late 1990s and early 2010s) has faced a pandemic, the rise of right-wing populism across the West, economic uncertainty—and an increasingly catastrophic climate crisis. Young people will experience the effects of climate change most acutely. So it is not surprising that they are taking part in more climate activism—like attending rallies and lobbying politicians—than their elders, according to a Pew study in 2021.

But burnt-out by the several “once-in-a-lifetime” events before many have even reached adulthood, Gen Z is experiencing environmental “crisis fatigue”. Gloomy forecasts mean they increasingly avoid climate news, and passionate youth-protest movements like the school strikes have lost momentum since their pre-pandemic peak. Committed Gen Zers might join newer, radical groups, like Just Stop Oil, that have a broader age range, and also attract seasoned environmentalists and pensioners.


PHOTO: AP
Weekend profile: Kim Yo Jong, North Korea’s propagandist-in-chief
Most people who speak on behalf of their government would not dare call a South Korean president an “impudent, flunky beggar” or compare America to a “scared barking dog”. But Kim Yo Jong, who controls North Korea’s propaganda apparatus, is not your average spokesperson.

Ms Kim is the younger sister of Kim Jong Un, the Supreme Leader, and granddaughter of Kim Il Sung, the founding father of North Korea. Yet blood alone cannot explain Ms Kim’s prominence. She has another brother, Kim Jong Chol—though his greatest achievement seems to be moderate competence on the guitar.

Kim Yo Jong cuts a more serious figure, the result of a life spent preparing for a position by her brother’s side. She was schooled, like her brothers, in Switzerland as a young child. In around 2014, not yet 30 years old, she became deputy director of the Propaganda and Agitation Department, which is responsible not just for the blistering put-downs that North Korea directs at its enemies but also for the ideological purity of the country itself. Lest the title of “deputy” director deceive, it should be said that Kims take orders from no one. Reports soon emerged that Ms Kim was the PAD’s de facto head.

A stream of especially foul invective followed. Park Geun-hye, then president of South Korea, was dubbed “a capricious whore” who “earnestly begs a gangster to beat someone” by state media. That gangster was, of course, America. Its president at the time, Barack Obama, was subject to vile racist abuse. Her prominence within the regime has only increased since. She often appears in public next to her brother, a mark of great prestige. In 2020 she issued a statement in her own name for the first time.

What is next for Ms Kim remains unclear. Every rumour of Kim Jong Un’s poor health sparks rabid speculation that she will succeed him. But being the Supreme Leader’s sibling is tricky. Some have had decorated careers. Others have fallen victim to purges. Despite her unique position, Ms Kim has one thing in common with all North Koreans: so long as Kim Jong Un lives, her life and fortunes are in his hands.


The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Jim Cottingham, Maple Ridge, British Columbia, Canada

Marcela Dutra, Montevideo, Uruguay

Libby Cheney, Houston, Texas, America

They all gave the correct answers of the Horst Wessel song, dexter, Vince Vaughn, Tom Coburn and Sir Steve McQueen. The theme is actors in The Magnificent Seven: Horst Buchholz, Brad Dexter, Robert Vaughn, James Coburn and Steve McQueen.

The questions were:

Monday: Which song, named after a supposed martyr, was the anthem of the Nazi party?
Tuesday: What is the Latin word for “right” as in “turn right”?
Wednesday: Which actor starred as Norman Bates in the 1998 remake of “Psycho”, the Hitchcock classic movie?
Thursday: Which Oklahoma senator, who served from 2005 to 2015, was nicknamed “Dr No” for his attempts to block federal spending?
Friday: Which British film director helmed “12 Years a Slave”?


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Scientist’s counterfeit-phone empire (11)

1 across Workplace no longer kept cool (6)

2 across Henry becoming new head of campaign generates interest (5)

3 across Audio cover for musical artist (6)

Factual clues

1 down A blockbuster not popular everywhere (11)

1 across Something Rishi Sunak took last year (6)

2 across Grouse shooting or wild swimming, for example (5)

3 across One who might take part in the American state department’s “hip-hop diplomacy” (6)


The fool who persists in his folly will become wise.

William Black
