The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (23:48 GMT+1 / 06:48 Hong Kong)

Russia launched renewed artillery fire on Ukraine’s eastern cities, including Kharkiv, its second largest, where at least 6 people were killed. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, said on Sunday night that Russia conducted 34 airstrikes on the country since Saturday. A destroyed residential building in Chasiv Yar, a town in the Donetsk province, killed at least 30 people and left two dozen trapped under rubble.

Twitter shares tumbled roughly 11% during the first day of trading since Elon Musk decided on Friday not to proceed with a $44bn takeover deal. The world’s richest man disagreed with the social-media giant about data provided by Twitter on the number of fake accounts. Twitter has hired Wachtell Lipton, an American law firm, to try to force Mr Musk to complete the deal.

Britain’s Conservative Party will announce its new leader on September 5th, according to Sir Graham Brady, chairman of the 1922 committee of Tory MPs. Boris Johnson, the prime minister, declined to endorse any of the 11 candidates vying to replace him. Nadhim Zahawi, the newly appointed chancellor of the exchequer, pledged to abolish a plan to raise corporation tax next year if he was chosen.

The euro fell to a 20-year low, bringing the currency to within one cent of parity with the dollar. High inflation and the prospect of an energy shortage—should Russia cut off Europe’s gas supply this winter—have left traders wary of an impending recession. While the dollar has remained strong, the euro’s slide has been quick. It was trading around $1.15 in February.

Klarna, a Swedish “buy now, pay later” platform, has seen its valuation drop to $6.7bn in its latest funding round. Once the most valuable private fintech company in Europe, the payments unicorn grew rapidly to a value of $46bn in June 2021, but has suffered from reduced consumer spending and broader economic troubles.

The United Nations released a report, marking World Population Day, which determined that India will overtake China to become the most populous country sometime in 2023. Each already weighs in at 1.4bn residents. India has been growing at a faster rate for decades, albeit slowing recently. The same report anticipates that humanity as a whole will hit 8bn by November of this year.

The office of Ranil Wickremesinghe, Sri Lanka’s prime minister, said on Monday that it had received confirmation that Gotabaya Rajapaksa, the president, would be stepping down on July 13th as promised. Protesters, who are currently occupying the presidential palace, have expressed scepticism about whether he will really resign and say they plan to stay put until he does. They are angry about the country’s financial crisis, rapid inflation, and shortages of food and fuel.

Fact of the day: 47bn, the volume, in cubic metres, of gas Russia piped to Europe in June—a third of the level in early 2021. Read the full article.

A full agenda for America and Mexico

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
President Joe Biden will receive his Mexican counterpart, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, in the White House on Tuesday. The agenda is expansive. Topping it will be tackling inflation and economic headwinds. Two years after a new free-trade agreement between America, Canada and Mexico came into force, the two leaders are urgently seeking to boost investment and maintain supply chains.

Security and the drugs trade will also be discussed, as manufacturing of fentanyl, a synthetic opioid frequently involved in overdoses in America, proliferates in Mexico. And the perennial topic of migration will return, too. As crossing conditions for migrants have become ever more dangerous, Mr López Obrador will make a plea for more visas. Last month 53 migrants, about half of them Mexicans, were found dead in the back of a lorry in Texas. It was the deadliest incident on record, but is unlikely to be the last.

The siren call for January 6th

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
“Be there, will be wild!” Donald Trump’s tweet, on December 19th 2020, invited his followers to join a “big protest” being planned in Washington, DC, to challenge the result of the presidential election Mr Trump had just lost to Joe Biden. On January 6th a mob stormed the Capitol building. On Tuesday this week the House of Representatives committee investigating the attack is to discuss whether that tweet served as a “siren call” to far-right and militia groups, such as the Oath Keepers and Proud Boys, who wanted to keep Mr Trump in power.

Many of those storming the Capitol belonged to a broad anti-government coalition known as the “patriot” movement. The network is decentralised, but its affiliated groups share a taste for conspiracy theories and a distrust of the federal government. Instances of political violence have declined since 2020. But as midterm elections approach in November, watchdogs worry that contested results could set off the extremists again.

Donetsk’s separatists open Moscow embassy

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The “Donetsk People’s Republic” provided the pretext Russia needed to invade Ukraine in February. The statelet in eastern Ukraine had declared independence in 2014 during the outbreak of war, sparked by Russia’s annexation of Crimea. But Russia only made its backing official on February 21st this year, when it recognised Donetsk and neighbouring Luhansk as independent and sent troops to the territories, three days before it sent them into the rest of Ukraine.

On Tuesday the DPR will receive another badge of statehood from its patron, as it opens its first embassy in Moscow. The opening ceremony will be attended by Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov. His office says the move shows Russia’s solidarity with the “young republic”. It also sends a signal. The DPR sits within the Donbas region of Ukraine, the current focus of Russia’s attacks where intense fighting will determine the course of the war.

It’s beginning to look a lot like Prime Day

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Every year Amazon, an online retailer, offers shoppers who have paid for its premium delivery service, Prime, heavy discounts on all sorts of items. Prime Day—which is actually two days and starts on Tuesday—may mean Christmas comes early.

The company’s performance has been rocky of late. A first-quarter loss in April prompted the worst sell-off of Amazon’s shares since 2006. So a successful Prime Day would bring a needed boost. Last year’s online extravaganza earned a record $11.2bn in sales, with 65% generated in America. This year’s event may attract even higher numbers as shoppers seek discounts amid rising inflation.

Other retailers will watch Prime Day for clues of buyers’ behaviour. Many will snap up basics: 58% of American consumers surveyed on July 6th by NielsenIQ, a data outfit, say they will seek out inexpensive household products. But another survey, by Salesforce, suggests that the drive for discounts could be so strong that many shoppers buy Christmas presents, too.

Glimpsing the very first stars

PHOTO: NASA, ESA, CSA, STSCI, WEBB ERO
On the ground it was delayed, over budget and at risk of being axed. Off the ground things have been going very well indeed for the James Webb Space Telescope. The trip to its orbit was carried out so precisely that it saved enough fuel to perhaps double its lifetime. The deployment of its shields, mirrors and instrumentation: flawless. And on Monday evening its first full-colour image was revealed at the White House by NASA; a clutch more will be unveiled on Tuesday.

A joint project between the space agencies of America, Canada and Europe, the JWST provides astronomers with the most powerful tool yet to scan the cosmos in infrared frequencies, picking up the most distant objects. Given that, to astronomers, “distant” also means “longer ago” in cosmic terms, the telescope will be able to spot signs of the cosmic dawn—the moment when the universe’s first stars ignited.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which member of the Monty Python group trained as a doctor?

In the country of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.

Desiderius Erasmus
