The world in brief May 28, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 22:33 GMT+1 / 05:33 Hong Kong

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, admitted that talks with his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, could be necessary to end the war. Yesterday he had accused the Kremlin of pursuing an “obvious policy of genocide”; the UN said that at least 4,000 civilians have been killed since the war began. Meanwhile, Russian forces continued their push into the Donbas region of Ukraine. The mayor of Severodonetsk, an encircled city, said that 1,500 of its citizens have been killed and 90% of housing damaged.

Officials in Uvalde, Texas, admitted that police waited an hour between their entry to the school and their confrontation with the shooter during the massacre on Tuesday, in which 21 people died. At least two children called 911 from inside the classrooms where the gunman’s rampage unfolded. A law-enforcement official said it was the “wrong decision” not to enter the classrooms sooner.

Iran seized two Greek-flagged oil tankers in the Persian Gulf. The action appears to have been payback for Greece’s role helping America confiscate oil shipments from an Iranian-flagged ship in Greek waters earlier this week. Greece’s foreign ministry accused Iran of “acts of piracy”.

G7 energy ministers called on OPEC, a cartel of oil producing countries, to “act in a responsible manner” and boost output to tackle rising global energy prices. In the same breath the leaders made climate pledges to end “inefficient fossil fuel subsidies” by 2025. OPEC will meet next week but is expected to resist calls to pump more oil.

In Brazil, video footage of a black man asphyxiating to death in the boot of a police car caused widespread anger. Accounts differ as to why Genivaldo de Jesus Santos was stopped by the police in the city of Umbaúba, but he was handcuffed and forced into the boot by officers who then apparently let off a gas grenade beside him. Mr Santos’s widow described the incident as a “crime”.

A federal judge dismissed a lawsuit by Donald Trump attempting to halt the New York attorney-general’s probe into alleged fraud at his real-estate business. It was the second legal defeat for America’s former president in two days: on Thursday he was ordered to testify under oath in the civil investigation. Previously the state prosecutor’s office said “some kind of enforcement action” against Mr Trump and his business would probably come soon.

ABBA returned to the stage after four decades in “ABBA Voyage”, a digital show that uses motion capture technology and a live backing band to recreate the 1970s superband in their prime. Thursday’s premier in London was attended by Sweden’s King Carl XVI Gustaf along with the four real-life members of the band.

Word of the Week: Jubilee, a celebration of stasis. Britain is preparing to mark the Queen’s 70 years on the throne. Read the full story.

Hearing Australia’s Aboriginals

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Fifty-five years ago Australians voted in a referendum to remove a clause in the constitution that excluded Aboriginals from the national census. Each year the country commemorates the anniversary of that milestone with National Reconciliation Week, which began on Friday. Now Australia’s new government wants to hold another referendum on Aboriginal rights.

Anthony Albanese, who was sworn in as Labor prime minister on May 23rd, wants to implement the “Uluru statement”, which was issued in 2017 by indigenous leaders who sought more power over the laws and policies that concern them. Among the statement’s demands is a call for the establishment of a “First Nations voice enshrined in the constitution.”

Aboriginals make up about 3% of Australia’s population and are disadvantaged in almost every measure. This, their elders argue, is because they are not “heard”. The previous government dismissed the statement’s call on the grounds that establishing a “voice” risked competing with the existing two legislative chambers. (In reality, any new body would probably be advisory.) But Mr Albanese wants to answer the Uluru statement’s “patient, gracious call” with a referendum on whether to set up such an advisory body within three years.

Donald Trump visits the Cowboy State

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Saturday Wyomingites may swap their usual cowboy hats for “Make America Great Again” baseball caps when Donald Trump arrives for a rally in Casper. The former president will campaign for Harriet Hageman, a lawyer who has earned a reputation for taking on environmental regulation. Ms Hageman hopes his popularity—70% of Wyomingites supported Mr Trump in 2020—will help her defeat Liz Cheney in the Republican primary this August for the state’s sole congressional seat.

Ms Cheney has had a target on her back ever since she voted to impeach Mr Trump after his supporters ransacked the Capitol building on January 6th 2021. Once the third-ranking Republican in the House of Representatives, her break from party orthodoxy saw her demoted. She is one of only two Republican members of a House committee investigating the Capitol riot. Ms Hageman herself was once a “Never Trumper”; at the Republican National Convention in 2016 she plotted ways to try to deny Mr Trump the nomination. Her newfound allegiance reflects the enduring power of Mr Trump’s support in one of America’s reddest states.

Ukrainian refugees return home

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Monday Leyla Kayacik, a special representative from the Council of Europe, will visit Poland to meet Ukrainian refugees. She may find many of them packing up. Some say their country is now safe, or at least safer than at any time since the war started. Some were unable to find work abroad. Many simply missed loved ones. Whatever their motive, lots of the nearly 6.7m Ukrainians forced to flee their country by Russia’s invasion are heading home. Nearly all are women and children, since men of fighting age were not allowed to leave Ukraine.

In the week to May 25th the number of Ukrainian returnees from Poland (198,000) exceeded arrivals (150,000). (Other countries that border Ukraine are seeing a similar trend.) Many more refugees will return when the war ends. According to one survey only 17% of the Ukrainian refugees in Poland, which hosts more than anywhere else, say they want to settle there permanently. Still, with the course of the war uncertain, even those heading home accept that they may need to escape Russian bombs once again.

Digitising Africa’s cultural heritage

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Timbuktu conjures up images of gold and Saharan caravans. But the Malian desert city was also a flourishing centre of knowledge. Between the 11th and 18th centuries scholars in Timbuktu produced some 450,000 manuscripts on subjects ranging from music to slavery. When jihadist violence threatened to destroy them in 2012 Abdel Kader Haidara, a historian, began secretly transporting the fragile books to Bamako, Mali’s capital. Since then locals have worked with Google to digitise these remarkable records.

Now anyone can leaf through a virtual selection of them on the tech giant’s site. The curious can also explore the mighty mud-brick mosque of Djenné in 3D, or wander virtually through the Nubian pyramids of Sudan. Meanwhile, earlier this month Ghana’s new museum of Pan African Heritage unveiled a digital gallery ahead of its formal opening next year. Such online initiatives help to preserve heritage in remote or unstable regions, and make it easier to explore Africa’s diverse cultures.

Weekend profile: Sir Michael Lockett, Britain’s official party monster

PHOTO: ALAMY
Who better to portray Queen Elizabeth II than a 22-year-old Singaporean dancer? On June 5th Janice Ho will play the future monarch as a young princess, dancing with a 21-foot-tall dragon puppet, in an elaborate pageant in central London to mark the climax of the platinum jubilee celebrations. Ms Ho was selected for the role, say the organisers, to reflect the “make-up of Britain and London today”.

Following more traditional fare such as military bands, the dragon dance sets the tone for a day-long carnival, the highlight of four days of hoopla and holiday on the 70th anniversary of the queen’s accession to the throne. And as so often for such national events, Sir Michael Lockett will be at the heart of it all. Meanwhile, some 150 official “national treasures”, including fellow nonagenarian Sir David Attenborough, will help Her Majesty party. There will be a retro-fashion show of Britain’s “tribes”—jivers, punks and ravers—and an interpretation of the 1953 coronation in “Afro-Caribbean style”. Finally, the queen will be serenaded by Ed Sheeran, a pop star.

This eclectic mix of ancient and modern, pomp and pop, flair and tradition, has become the hallmark of Britain’s post-imperial ceremonies, and Sir Michael has been involved in almost all of them. The lean, unassuming 74-year-old is at the helm of this pageant as co-chairman. He also helped steer the golden jubilee concerts at Buckingham Palace in 2002 and the diamond jubilee’s Thames river pageant ten years later. Sir Michael’s events company also helped organise the opening and closing ceremonies of the London Olympics in 2012. He opened the Shard and oversaw the inaugural New Year’s Eve fireworks at the London Eye. The country rarely parties without Sir Michael.

He admits to being an “obsessive”, waking up in the small hours to worry about his to-do list. The son of an army officer, Sir Michael chose to go straight into business rather than attend university. He says that storytelling is the most powerful means of communication, and on June 5th he hopes to be telling not just the story of “an incredible life” but also “the second Elizabethan age.”

The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Izumi Waki, Tokyo, Japan

North America: Jane Gose, Kihei, Hawaii, United States

Central and South America: Celso Covre, Brasília, Brazil

Europe: Marga Peeters, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Africa: Machaba Sathekge, Klerksdorp, South Africa

Oceania: Linda Haselhurst, Sydney, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Jimmy Stewart, Avro Lancaster, Hanover, Paul Tudor Jones and Windsor knot. The theme is British royal houses: Stuart, Lancaster, Hanover, Tudor and Windsor.

Weekly crossword

Welcome to our new crossword, designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers:

Cryptic clues
1 down Lancastrian town where sheep droppings come from? (10)
1 across Boris hides inside Indian sage (5)
2 across Fab South forms German world-beater (4)
3 across Irish county Romeo gets a dressing (5)

Quick clues
1 down Where Britain saw roistering in 1809 (10)
1 across Tory windfall exploiter (5)
2 across The world's largest chemicals company (4)
3 across What Gustavo Petro was in Bogotá (5)

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent in Friday's edition.


"There is no greater agony than bearing an untold story inside you."

Maya Angelou