The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (22:40 GMT+1 / 05:40 Hong Kong)

New data suggested that America’s economy shrunk for the second quarter in a row, putting the country in a technical recession. GDP fell by an annualised rate of 0.9%, according to the first estimate of America’s Bureau of Economic Analysis, driven by decreases in private company investment. Higher consumer spending was not enough to counteract that. Officially, though, America is not in a recession: that is for the National Bureau of Economic Research to decide.

Xi Jinping, China’s president, warned Joe Biden about interfering with Taiwan, saying that “those who play with fire will perish by it”, according to Chinese state media. The two leaders spoke on a call for more than two hours, also discussing Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. US-China relations have entered a particularly perilous period following reports that Nancy Pelosi, America’s Speaker of the House of Representatives, would visit Taiwan.

Amazon’s sales grew by 7% year on year, to $121bn, surpassing analysts’ expectations. The firm’s forecast for third-quarter revenue growth was even better, ranging from 13-17%, sending its share price up by more than a tenth in after-hours trading. But the poor performance of its investment in Rivian, an electric-vehicle startup, saw Amazon book its second consecutive quarterly loss. Meanwhile, Apple’s revenues rose by 2% year on year, to $83bn, lifted by stronger-than-expected iPhone sales. Net income fell by 10%.

JetBlue agreed to buy Spirit, a rival American airline, for $3.8bn, after Frontier, another airline, pulled out of a bidding war. The deal will create America’s fifth-largest airline, which JetBlue bosses think will be able to compete with giants like American, United and Delta.

At least three people died in flash floods in south-eastern Kentucky. Some parts of the state have received up to 14 inches (36cm) of rain in the past two days; more rainfall was expected on Thursday. Andy Beshear, the governor, said to anticipate “double-digit deaths”.

Centrica, the parent company of British Gas, reported a booming £1.3bn ($1.6bn) profit in the first half of 2022, compared to £262m ($318m) in the first half of last year. Shell, an oil supermajor, also posted a record-breaking $11.5bn profit in the second quarter. Their profits reflect rising energy prices stoked by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, as households around the world struggle with increased costs of living.

DeepMind, an artificial-intelligence company owned by Alphabet, said it has predicted the structure of almost every known protein, paving the way for big biological breakthroughs. The company published a database of over 200m proteins’ structures, predicted by its AlphaFold AI. Figuring out proteins’ shapes has been one of the biggest unsolved problems in biology. The new database should make it much easier for researchers to develop new medicines and other biotech innovations.

Fact of the day: 31%, the share of Americans who say the economy is their most important issue. Read the full story.

Ukraine’s grain sets sail

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A ship packed with Ukrainian grain is poised to leave Odessa on Friday. It would be the first to leave the port under a deal brokered last week by António Guterres, the UN’s secretary-general, and Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president.

Despite a Russian missile strike on Odessa’s port on July 23rd, one day after the deal was signed, it has so far survived. A co-ordination centre in Istanbul, staffed by officials from Russia, Turkey, Ukraine and the UN, will inspect ships entering and leaving Ukrainian ports to ensure they do not carry weapons. Ukraine may have to clear some of the mines it planted in its own waters, to prevent an amphibious invasion, to create corridors for cargo ships.

The deal may ease a global food crisis intensified by the grain blockade. But uncertainty abounds. The costs of insuring shipments through the Black Sea have spiked, as companies fret about Russian attacks. And Russia could still—literally—torpedo the deal.

America revs up its industrial policy

PHOTO: EYEVINE
The CHIPS and Science Act, a bill aimed at building up America’s technological muscle, onshoring chip manufacturing and countering China, has had a torturous path. A version was first proposed in 2020. But this week, it finally sailed through votes in the Senate and the House. On Friday President Joe Biden is expected to sign it into law.

The bill allocates about $52bn to the semiconductor industry, providing subsidies to manufacture chips in America. A separate $200bn will go towards scientific research, particularly in cutting-edge fields such as artificial intelligence and advanced manufacturing.

There are plenty of sceptics about the potential impact. America’s advantage in the semiconductor industry lies in design, not manufacturing, but the legislation is focused on the latter. Managing such a huge infusion of cash into the sciences will also be a challenge. But given America’s political polarisation, Congress’s ability to agree on such a big initiative is remarkable in itself.

Skyrocketing profits at ExxonMobil

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
ExxonMobil, an American oil firm, is expected to unveil its best quarterly financial results in at least 25 years on Friday. Its profits for the second quarter could shoot up to $18bn, more than double the figure it posted in the previous three months. Two factors are boosting the company’s fortunes. First, Russia’s war in Ukraine has led to a crunch in refined products like petrol and diesel. That has increased ExxonMobil’s refining margins by as much as $4.6bn. Second, higher global oil and gas prices will increase profits by up to $3.3bn.

But there might be trouble ahead. Sky-high profits for energy firms have triggered a political backlash: more governments may follow Britain’s lead in imposing windfall taxes. And elevated prices could eventually reduce demand, for example by spurring faster adoption of electric vehicles. As industry veterans say, the best cure for high prices is high prices.

NATO’s new favourite port

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A few years ago, the privatisation of Alexandroupolis would have garnered little attention. But the strategic importance of the Greek port has grown since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Located on the Aegean sea, Alexandroupolis provides road and rail links with NATO’s eastern flank and Ukraine. America’s army has already moved 630 lorry- and train-loads of military hardware through the port, with much more planned. Britain and Italy also intend to use it.

On Friday offers are due from four consortiums vying to take over Alexandroupolis. Unsurprisingly, Joe Biden's administration wants to see the 40-year concession go to one of the two contenders financed by American investors. The two other bidders have links to Russia. One of them, headed by a firm linked to Dimitris Copelouzos, a Greek billionaire with long-standing ties to Gazprom, Russia’s state-controlled gas giant, is widely seen as the front-runner. The once-sleepy port may soon become a geopolitical flashpoint.

Improving HIV prevention

PHOTO: AP
For years, abstinence and condoms were the only ways to prevent HIV infections. A daily pill of tenofovir and emtricitabine was later approved for high-risk people; it prevents people from contracting HIV, even if exposed. But last year American regulators approved a new regimen: injections of cabotegravir, a new drug, every two months. In trials in Africa, cabotegravir was 89% more effective at preventing acquisition of the disease than the daily pill among women at high risk. Ahead of the International AIDS Conference, which begins in Montreal on Friday, the World Health Organisation released new guidelines recommending cabotegravir.

Treatment, too, has improved. For years, people with HIV/AIDS had to take several pills a day to stay healthy and reduce the chances of transmission. In December European authorities approved the use of infrequent cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections as a treatment; the injections are as effective as pills in suppressing viral loads but much less burdensome. For people affected by HIV, science has delivered some relief.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: What was the code name of the Apollo 11 lunar module?

Thursday: Which animated characters are the “rescue rangers” who are the focus of a new Disney film?

What would life be if we had no courage to attempt anything?

Vincent Van Gogh
