The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (22:16 GMT+1 / 05:16 Hong Kong)

The governor of Luhansk, a region in eastern Ukraine, said Ukrainian forces now controlled only the outskirts of Severodonetsk, the industrial city which has become the front line of Russia’s invasion. Serhiy Haidai said the city was being shelled relentlessly and he predicted Russian forces would intensify their bombardment of it and the nearby city of Lysychansk.

Hundreds of millions were at risk of “hunger and destitution” because of food shortages caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, warned António Guterres, the chief of the UN. Turkey has been trying to negotiate safe passage for grain stuck in Black Sea ports but Russia has said delivery to international markets depended on the end of sanctions. Ukraine is one of the world’s biggest wheat exporters.

An 11-year-old survivor of a school shooting in Uvalde, Texas, described to lawmakers how she smeared herself in blood after a gunman killed her teacher and friends. The hearing, which included testimony from relatives of victims of the shooting in which 21 were murdered, took place before Congress voted on a package of gun-control measures, which is unlikely to pass in the Senate.

Malaysia and Turkey joined a growing list of Muslim-majority countries to protest against statements made by a spokesperson for India’s ruling party, in which she disparaged the Prophet Muhammad. The Hindu-nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party suspended Nupur Sharma on Sunday for her comments, which were televised on May 26th. Now right-wing Indians are irritated that the government has not stood behind its anti-Islamic rhetoric.

An armed man who was found outside the home of Brett Kavanaugh, a conservative justice on America’s Supreme Court, was charged with attempted murder. He reportedly told police he had travelled from Maryland to “kill a specific…Justice.” He also said he was upset about the leak, in May, of a draft ruling showing the conservative-majority court had voted to overturn Roe v Wade, the ruling that abortion is a constitutional right.

Credit Suisse, a Swiss bank, issued its third profit warning this year. It predicted a loss in the second-quarter, driven by poor performance in its investment banking division. The bank blamed Ukraine-driven volatility and inflation-driven monetary tightening for the loss. Bloomberg reported that the bank is considering layoffs to cut costs. Its shares fell 7.6% on the news, before recovering slightly.

A mask looted from a Belgian colony in Africa was returned to the Democratic Republic of Congo—the first of 84,000 artefacts the government has promised to repatriate. The mask had been exhibited in Belgium’s Royal Museum for Central Africa. On a visit to the DRC, King Philippe of Belgium said it was now on “indefinite loan” to the National Museum in Kinshasa.

Investigating the Capitol insurrection

PHOTO: AP
Congressional hearings are often dramatic. Those that begin in the House of Representatives on Thursday will be extraordinary. The hearings will focus on the events of January 6th 2021, when a mob, seemingly encouraged by then-President Donald Trump, stormed the Capitol building in an effort to overturn the certification of Joe Biden’s election victory. The January 6th committee, composed of seven Democrats and two Republicans, has spent the past year interviewing over 1,000 people and reviewing over 140,000 documents. In six televised sessions it will present a portion of what it has collected, ahead of the publication of a full report in September.

The hearings will reveal the extent of Mr Trump’s culpability. Commentators on the right are therefore likely to belittle the committee’s work as a witch-hunt. But for Democrats, the hearings may be their last hope of rallying complacent voters against Mr Trump and his Republican enablers before mid-term elections in November.

The ECB’s dilemma

PHOTO: PRESS ASSOCIATION
Spare a thought for the policymakers of the European Central Bank, gathering in Amsterdam on Thursday to chart the course of euro-zone monetary policy. The ECB faces an unenviable dilemma: tighten monetary policy to fight inflation, or keep it loose to support a weakening economy?

Not all of Europe’s economy is in a shambles. Its service sectors, especially in the sunny southern parts, are basking in the reopening of hotels and restaurants. The labour economy remains strong, too. But manufacturing is feeling the triple brunt of supply disruptions, high energy prices and tighter consumer budgets. Data released on Tuesday showed that Germany’s factory orders shrank in April; on Wednesday the OECD, a rich-country think-tank, downgraded its forecast for Europe. Yet at around 8% inflation is at a record high, and the pressure on the ECB, where the deposit rate is still negative, is mounting. In Amsterdam the bank is likely to announce the end of bond-buying and to signal a few, careful rate increases in the coming months.


China counts the cost of zero-covid

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
On June 6th authorities in Beijing allowed the city’s abundant restaurants to reopen, as new covid-19 infections slowed to a trickle. Patrons will have much to digest. A string of economic data releases over the next seven days, starting with trade on Thursday, will reveal the depth of the difficulties from which China’s economy must now escape.

Retail sales, industrial production and housing starts probably all shrank year-on-year in May, which in many cities was a second month of lockdowns and restrictions. Those hoping for a strong recovery in the rest of the year may be disappointed. Normality has yet to return in full (in Beijing schools will not reopen until June 13th) and even once it has, the threat of a further viral outbreak will still loom. A recent survey by Morgan Stanley, a bank, found that more people expected to cut their spending over the next month than to increase it. In only two categories was the opposite true: groceries and education. For China’s leaders, that ought to be food for thought.

Somalia’s returning president

PHOTO: REUTERS
The first time Hassan Sheikh Mohamud was president of Somalia, his authority stretched little farther than the sandbagged gates of the bullet-pocked presidential palace in Mogadishu. Al-Shabab, a jihadist group, ran amok and terrorist attacks were routine. Decades of civil war had left the country resembling a gaggle of warring fiefdoms.

Mr Mohamud’s first term ended in 2017, when he lost to Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed. But after winning an election in May he will begin a second on Thursday. It is the first time since Somalia gained independence in 1960 that anyone has been president twice. But Mr Mohamud inherits a country that has slid dangerously backwards. The outgoing president centralised power, picked fights with Somalia’s neighbours and, by refusing to leave office, raised the prospect of renewed civil war. Most worrying, though, is the resurgence of the jihadists, who have regained territory. Mr Mohamud’s first task, he tells The Economist, is to beat them back.

Sectarianism enters the culture wars

PHOTO:
Before its release in Britain, Muslim scholars warned that “The Lady of Heaven”, a historical drama about Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad, would be divisive. They were not wrong. British Sunnis have slammed the film, which was written by a Shia cleric, for comparing three of the Prophet’s companions to Islamic State terrorists. But many Shias have also criticised it for deliberately seeking to sow discord among Muslims.

Following protests, this week Cineworld, a British cinema chain, cancelled all screenings of the film. That sparked a culture war. Sajid Javid, a government minister, said he was concerned about Britain’s “growing cancel culture”. But the row will probably encourage more people to go and watch the film in those cinemas that will continue to screen it. If so, they may be disappointed. Critics have dismissed “The Lady of Heaven” as “half-baked” and “shoddy”.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which actress won two Oscars in the 1970s for “Klute” and “Coming Home”?

Wednesday: Who was the first African-American woman elected to Congress?

There is more than one kind of wisdom, and all are essential in the world; it is not bad that they should alternate.

Marguerite Yourcenar
