The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 1, 2023

In France protesters paralysed public transport and closed schools in the second national demonstration against President Emmanuel Macron’s most recent attempt to reform pensions. Mr Macron wants to raise France’s unusually low minimum retirement age from 62 to 64. But this has proved wildly unpopular: over a million people attended the previous protest on January 19th and 68% of French people disagree with the reform.

America said Russia is not complying with New Start, the two countries’ last remaining nuclear-arms control treaty. Russia has suspended weapons inspections and pulled out of consultations, officials from America’s state department said in a report to Congress. The compliance failures heighten concerns that the two powers will be unable to negotiate an extension to New Start, which expires in 2026.

Exxon Mobil recorded a record annual profit last year, of $55.7bn. The only firms that have outperformed the oil major or are likely to are Alphabet, Apple and Microsoft. It was the fourth-best performing stock in the S&P 500 last year—up by about 80%. Exxon’s stellar year was fuelled by surging energy prices amid the war in Ukraine.

The euro zone looks set to narrowly dodge a recession after the region’s economy grew by 0.1% in the fourth quarter of 2022. Record energy prices, forced up by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and high inflation had been expected to lead to a contraction in the economy. The euro-zone’s meagre expansion is, however, somewhat inflated by Ireland where multinationals book profits to swerve tax.

George Santos, the American congressman who lied about much of his biography, told Republican lawmakers that he would temporarily recuse himself from his committee appointments in the House of Representatives. Kevin McCarthy, the House speaker, had given Mr Santos seats on the small-business and the science, space and technology committees. Mr Santos faces multiple investigations into fabrications related to his campaign.

Snap’s fourth-quarter revenues, of $1.3bn, were essentially flat from the same period a year ago, dragging down its share price by 13% in post-session trading. The social-media firm reported a loss of $288m. By contrast Spotify’s share price leapt by almost 13%. The audio-streamer reported a quarterly loss of €231m ($251m) on revenues of €3.2bn, but a 20% increase in users, to 489m.

The value of Norway’s $1.3trn sovereign-wealth fund, one of the world’s largest, fell by around 14% in 2022. The fund, which holds assets nearly three times larger than Norway’s GDP, lost 1.64trn krone ($167bn) last year. Nicolai Tangen, its chief executive, said that the war in Ukraine, high inflation and rising interest rates had all done damage.

Fact of the day: $230bn, the amount China spent on defence in 2022. Read the full story.

India’s budget-balancing act

PHOTO: AFP
On Wednesday India’s government will present its budget for the coming fiscal year. Narendra Modi, the prime minister, has called it a “ray of hope”. Reality may be more sobering.

India faces many economic challenges. Inflation remains close to the central bank’s upper limit of 6%. And after splurging on social-welfare schemes during the pandemic, government finances are tight, with debt rising. Investors will be hoping for signs of fiscal consolidation, such as a commitment to rein in spending.

Yet the temptation for Mr Modi may be to keep spending. A global economic slowdown risks tempering India’s growth, the fastest among big economies last year. Unemployment is rising, too. And splurging would also have political advantages. Nine states are expected to hold elections this year. And this is the last full budget before a general election in 2024. Economists, however, expect that the government will resist populist largesse, and instead focus on economic stability.

Downshift, not dovish shift, for the Fed

PHOTO: REUTERS
The Federal Reserve is reducing the intensity of its monetary tightening. It is widely expected on Wednesday to raise interest rates by one-quarter of a percentage point. That would be smaller than its last increase, a half-point in December, which itself was a step down after a series of three-quarter-point increases. The shift to smaller increments reflects the fact that, with rates now high enough to restrict economic activity, inflation has started to decelerate.

America’s central bank has a tricky task. Many investors think it is moving away from hawkishness, perhaps opening the door to rate cuts before the year’s end. That has helped cause a rebound in stock and bond prices over the past month. But the Fed worries that excessive rallies could undo its work to tame inflation. So Jerome Powell, the Fed’s chairman, may deliver a stern message to try to rein in the bulls before they charge too far ahead.


Myanmar’s state of emergency

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
In 2015 and 2020 Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy won democratic elections in Myanmar and led the first civilian governments in decades. But Wednesday marks two years since the army took back power in a coup and shattered the country’s young democracy, locking Ms Suu Kyi up for good measure.

It is also decision time for the army, which looks set to extend the state of emergency that it declared on the day of the coup. That keeps power in the hands of General Min Aung Hlaing, who is also the prime minister, and who has failed to quell an anti-coup uprising that is becoming enmeshed in the country’s old ethnic conflicts.

Speculation abounds nevertheless that the regime will try to hold sham elections this year and begin a showy transition to a veneer of civilian government. The UN warns that a vote during the civil war would “fuel greater violence” as resistance fighters try to derail the polls. Peace has rarely felt so remote.

Investigating covid jobless claims

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
During the pandemic American states paid out billions of dollars in covid relief, including $794bn in hastily arranged aid schemes to unemployed workers. But fraud was rife. Scammers claimed benefits using stolen social-security numbers, taking the details of prisoners and even the dead. On Thursday the House Oversight Committee will hold a hearing to investigate fraudulent claims—which by some estimates could total as much as $400bn.

With the Republicans now in control of the House, the Oversight Committee has new ambitions. James Comer, the new chair of the committee, wants to use it as a platform to scrutinise President Joe Biden and his administration more widely. Mr Biden’s family’s business dealings, migrants at the southern border and America’s withdrawal from Afghanistan are all on the table. Benefit fraud, the focus of this hearing, will be hard to pin on Mr Biden, however. The aid program was established during Donald Trump’s term and only extended by Mr Biden a year later.

“One Woman Show” goes down under

PHOTO: WILL BREMRIDGE
Liz Kingsman’s rise has been impressive. “One Woman Show”, written and performed by the Australian-British comedian, launched in a 50-seat venue just before the pandemic closed theatres in 2020. In 2022 it moved to London’s West End. On Wednesday it begins a run at Sydney Opera House.

The one-woman show, in which a performer plays several characters, has a place in entertainment history. The form launched such comedians as Whoopi Goldberg. Ms Kingsman’s “One Woman Show” is a hilarious deconstruction of the genre. It parodies a trend, inspired by Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s “Fleabag”, in which a young female protagonist narrates her fashionably out-of-control life.

“One Woman Show” lampoons the vogue for revealing the personal. “It’s almost as if the more explicit this is, the braver I am,” explains Ms Kingsman’s on-stage alter-ego. It mocks, too, the way confessional comedy can lead to personal success. That her parody has brought her fame is, the real-life Ms Kingsman admits, “deeply ironic”.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which magazine did Helen Gurley Brown edit for 32 years?

Tuesday: What was the code name given to the development of the nuclear bomb during the second world war?

A literature that is alive does not live by yesterday’s clock, nor by today’s but by tomorrow’s.

Yevgeny Zamyatin
