The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (23:07 GMT+1 / 06:07 Hong Kong)

Russia increased attacks on Zaporizhia, a city in southern Ukraine, where at least 12 civilians died over the last two days. Ukrainian officials suggest that Russia employed Iranian-supplied drones alongside ongoing missile attacks. Amid growing criticism of Russia’s military leadership, the commander of its eastern military district, Alexander Chaiko, has been fired according to RBC, a Russian news outlet. Ukraine has recently made significant advances on both the eastern and southern fronts.

This year’s Nobel peace prize was awarded to one individual and two organisations fighting authoritarianism in the post-Soviet region. The prize was shared between Ales Bialiatski, a Belarusian pro-democracy activist, Memorial, one of Russia’s oldest human rights organisations, long hounded by the Kremlin, and the Centre for Civil Liberties, a Ukrainian human rights group that has documented war crimes since Russia’s invasion.

A rout in American shares on Friday erased most of the gains of an early-week rally, though markets still ended the week higher. Among the poor performers was Advanced Micro Devices: its share price tumbled by nearly 14% after the chipmaker cut its forecast for third-quarter revenues by more than $1bn. Levi Strauss shed more than 11% in value after the retailer reported lower-than-expected earnings.

America’s labour market slowed slightly in September as aggressive rate rises targeting high inflation have cooled the economy. Official data recorded 263,000 new jobs, which was fewer than the 315,000 positions added in August, but better than expected. That resilience may invite further tightening from the Fed at its next meeting on November 2nd.

A UN agency said its 193 members agreed to eliminate greenhouse-gas emissions in the civil-aviation sector by 2050. China, which is set to overtake America as the biggest aviation market this decade, expressed doubt over reaching the goal. European countries that had sought a more ambitious target called the non-binding deal a “compromise”.

America’s commerce department imposed new limits on the export of advanced computer chips to China. Firms will need to acquire a licence to export the chips, which America said China was using to advance its army’s technological prowess and “commit human rights abuses”. China called the move “sci-tech hegemony”.

Credit Suisse said it would buy back up to $3bn of its own debt in a bid to reassure investors amid persistent concerns about its liquidity. Before the announcement shares in the Swiss bank had fallen 55% this year, while credit default swaps, an insurance-like derivative, had risen. But the latest move helped calm markets: shares in the bank rose 3% in early trading.

Word of the week: masuku bijin, a Japanese phrase to describe someone who looks beautiful in a face mask. Read the full story.

How long can Ukraine’s winning streak last?

PHOTO: EPA
Ukraine’s blistering counter-offensive has, in recent weeks, left Russian forces in disarray, particularly in the Kharkiv region in the east and Kherson in the south. But the current wave of liberation will probably soon reach its peak.

This month Ukrainian soldiers in Kherson pushed Russian fighters along the Dnieper river, 30km from the previous front line. And they have continued to make substantial gains in the north of the region. Ukraine’s troops are honing in on parts of northern Luhansk, the only one of the four annexed regions where Russia enjoys anything close to complete control. They hope to push the Russians back to their positions from before the full-scale invasion.

But the window of opportunity may prove short. Russian forces will soon be bolstered by thousands of recently mobilised troops. Though poorly trained, they will supplement Mr Putin’s fight. And the onset of wintery conditions may soon chill the advance.


Nevada’s nail-biting Senate race

PHOTO: AP
One indication of a tight election is whether party bigwigs hit the campaign trail. Nevada has become a runway for wannabe Republican presidential candidates. Donald Trump will head to the state on Saturday to stump for Adam Laxalt and Joe Lombardo, the Republican hopefuls for Senate and governor. Ron DeSantis, the governor of Florida, and various members of Mr Trump’s former cabinet, have also visited the Silver State.

The Economist’s midterms model suggests Nevada’s Senate race is a toss-up, making it a crucial battleground for control of Congress’s upper chamber. The contest will test whether Catherine Cortez Masto, the Democratic incumbent, can woo Latino voters who abandoned her party between 2016 and 2020. Democrats may also discover whether their political machine can endure despite the death of its architect and former Senate majority leader, Harry Reid. Reid’s machine turned Nevada light blue. Come November it may have a different hue.

The New York Philharmonic returns to Lincoln Centre

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
In the late 1950s a working-class black and Hispanic neighbourhood in Manhattan was razed to make way for Lincoln Centre for the Performing Arts. This unsavoury legacy will be addressed when David Geffen Hall—the New York Philharmonic’s home at Lincoln Centre—re-opens on Saturday after a two-year, $550m renovation.

“San Juan Hill: A New York Story”, an orchestral piece by Etienne Charles, a jazz trumpeter, honours the rich culture of the destroyed neighbourhood, whose residents included Thelonious Monk, a jazz pianist. The upcoming season features music by several living composers, including Cuban-born Tania León and Marcos Balter, a Brazilian.

The hall—long criticised for its subpar acoustics and dreary décor—has been redesigned with amenities that include a giant screen in the lobby to simulcast concerts. These musical and architectural gestures are an attempt to atone for past transgressions and attract the younger and more diverse audience needed to secure the Philharmonic’s future.

The Women’s Rugby World Cup

PHOTO: EPA
According to bookmakers, there is little doubt which team will win the Women’s Rugby World Cup, which begins on Saturday in Auckland, New Zealand. Betting $100 on England will win you only $50 if they prevail, such is the recent dominance of the Red Roses. England enter the tournament on an unprecedented 25-match winning streak.

The last two times the team played New Zealand, who are five-time World Cup winners and current holders, England won 43-12 and 56-15. Canada and France, who have been knocked out at the semi-final stage on six occasions, are the other teams with some hope of glory. But it would be a big surprise if the final, on November 12th, were anything other than a repeat of the 2017 event. Five years ago, New Zealand staged a storming second-half comeback, to win 41-32. This time around, England are odds-on to exact their revenge.

Weekend Profile: Ron DeSantis, the man whom even hurricanes cannot batter

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As an undergraduate at Yale, Ron DeSantis captained the baseball team. Now Florida’s Republican governor has his mind on home runs of the political sort. Hurricane Ian, which hit his state on September 28th, has left more than 115 Floridians dead and caused up to $57bn in insured losses. That may make it the second-costliest hurricane to strike America, after Hurricane Katrina in 2005. But for Mr DeSantis the storm’s wreckage has brought political opportunity, and a chance to demonstrate managerial know-how.

On Wednesday he appeared alongside Joe Biden, whom he often criticises, as the president surveyed the damage. This time it was all comity. Mr DeSantis thanked him for providing federal aid; Mr Biden said that they had worked “hand in glove”.

Disaster management has revealed a fresh side to the governor. Until recently he seemed more interested in lobbing bombs in America’s culture wars. In April, after Disney criticised a state ban on the discussion of sexuality and gender orientation among young children in public-school classrooms, Mr DeSantis hit back. He hastily signed a law revoking Disney’s “special-district” status, which for decades had allowed the media giant to operate much like a county government at its complex in central Florida. Hammering Democrats for their perceived weakness on border security is another preoccupation. In September Mr DeSantis chartered private planes with state funds to send Venezuelan migrants in San Antonio, Texas, to Martha’s Vineyard, in Massachusetts, an enclave for the wealthy liberals Mr DeSantis loves to taunt.

Those stunts—along with his aversion to lockdowns during the pandemic—have endeared the governor to conservatives. Mr DeSantis is now viewed as a potential rival to Donald Trump, a fellow Florida resident, for the Republican nomination for the presidential election in 2024. He has fashioned himself in a similar vein, emphasising issues such as election “integrity” and border security, but carries none of the former president’s baggage.

Ironically it was Mr Trump’s surprise endorsement that helped Mr DeSantis take the governor’s mansion in 2018. That race was close enough to prompt a recount. In November he is expected to breeze to re-election—he commands an 11-point lead over his opponent, Charlie Crist. Now Mr DeSantis is focused on raising his national profile. Hurricane Ian has let him do just that.

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown the winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down City has a luau: topless duo go-go dancing! (11)

1 across Some iron linen virtually (6)

2 across European coach disheartened after odd doubts (5)

3 across Square, like crosswords nowadays (6)

Factual clues

1 down Troops are on the streets here for the second time this year (11)

1 across Where Cambodian syndicates carry out fraud worth $12bn a year? (6)

2 across Brother Andrew’s nationality (5)

3 across What an Iranian protest song declares clerical rule to be? (6)


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Yumi Arima, Tokyo, Japan

North America: Katie King, Vancouver, Canada

Central and South America: Alvaro Tomas, Panama City, Panama

Europe: Roar Medici, Koege, Denmark

Africa: Wael Abdel Wahab, Cairo, Egypt

Oceania: Jennifer Bladon-Clark, Melbourne, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Lightning rod, Marriage of Figaro, Mamma Mia, Galileo and Beezlebub. The theme is that these words all appear in the lyrics of Bohemian Rhapsody, the Queen song.

Those who adhere to the past won’t be able to cope with the future.

Willy Brandt
