The world in brief
May 4, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

As expected the Federal Reserve raised its benchmark interest rate by a quarter of a percentage point, bringing it to a range of 5-5.25%. Policymakers at America’s central bank hinted that the recent tightening regime may have run its course: their statement on Wednesday—unlike those at the past few meetings—made no suggestion that further increases would be appropriate.

Russia’s government accused Ukraine of being behind a drone attack on the Kremlin, President Vladimir Putin’s residence in Moscow, in what a spokesperson called a “terrorist attack” and an attempt on his life. Russian security services intercepted the two drones early on Wednesday morning and nobody was injured. Ukraine denied the accusation. Russia warned that it reserved the right to retaliate.

El Niño, a climate phenomenon which appears in the southern Pacific Ocean every two to seven years and influences weather around the world, will probably arrive in September according to the World Meteorological Organisation. Scientists say that this El Niño could produce record-breaking temperatures and change rainfall patterns. The phenomenon last occurred between 2018 and 2019.

Eight students and a security guard died after a 14-year-old opened fire at a school in Belgrade, the capital of Serbia. Another six pupils and one teacher were injured. The attacker, who is alleged to have used his father’s gun, was arrested on site. Mass shootings are rare in the Balkan country, which has stringent gun laws.

Police in Brazil raided the home of Jair Bolsonaro, the country’s former far-right president, as part of a criminal investigation into falsified covid-19 vaccination records. Mr Bolsonaro, an anti-vaxxer, travelled to America earlier this year using documents which he denies falsifying. But he has also denied taking the vaccine. Federal police are also investigating alleged voter suppression and embezzlement of official gifts.

Iran seized an oil tanker registered to Panama in the Strait of Hormuz, a narrow strip of water which connects the Persian Gulf to the world’s oceans. It is the country’s second such seizure in a week. On Thursday Iran took a ship registered to the Marshall Islands, in what could have been a response to an earlier American seizure of a tanker of Iranian crude oil.

Police in Europe and South America arrested more than 130 people associated with the 'Ndrangheta crime syndicate, Italy’s most powerful mafia. Suspects are accused of smuggling weapons and drugs across borders, among other things. Germany’s interior minister said that the sting, which spanned more than half a dozen European countries, was one of the largest so far in “the fight against Italian organised crime”.

Fact of the day: 7m, the number of people on Britain’s NHS waiting list for treatment. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Peace remains elusive in Sudan
Sudan’s latest “ceasefire” will begin overnight on Thursday. Brokered by Salva Kiir, the president of South Sudan, a neighbouring country, it is supposed to last seven days. That would be the longest truce yet and could even lead to peace talks in Juba, the South Sudanese capital. But Sudan’s beleaguered civilians are probably not holding their breath.

Neither of the armed factions which have been battling since April 15th has shown willingness to cede ground. The national army, led by General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, believes it will soon regain control of Khartoum, Sudan’s capital and site of much of the fighting. It has more troops, heavier weaponry and can count on military support from Egypt.

Meanwhile the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary force led by a warlord known as Hemedti, are spread throughout Khartoum and control an oil refinery and munitions factory. Though ostensibly the underdog, the RSF will not be defeated easily. Khartoum’s remaining residents are braced for more fighting.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
All eyes on Apple’s earnings
The world’s most valuable company will report its quarterly earnings on Thursday. Last week the other big beasts of Silicon Valley—Alphabet, Amazon and Microsoft—delivered better-than-expected results. Now all eyes are on Apple, especially demand for its iPhone, which accounted for just over half the company’s revenue last year. Worldwide sales of the smartphone are a barometer not just of Apple’s fortunes, but of consumer demand more broadly.

Lately sales of Apple’s gadgets have been impaired by supply problems. Last year China’s zero-covid strategy forced factories to shut down, hampering production of the new iPhone14 Pro. Geopolitical frostiness has made China still riskier as a place for an American company to do business. So Apple is hedging its bets. JPMorgan Chase, a bank, forecasts that by 2025 a quarter of iPhones will be made outside China. India, Vietnam and Thailand will be among the beneficiaries of this manufacturing windfall.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The booming business of obesity drugs
As Hollywood celebrities slim down by using Wegovy, a fashionable and expensive weight-loss jab, its maker, Novo Nordisk, is bulking up. Since January 2021 the market capitalisation of the Danish pharmaceutical darling has rocketed from $165bn to $385bn on the back of high expectations for its blockbuster drug. Morgan Stanley, a bank, told the Financial Times that it expects the market for medications like Wegovy could top $50bn by 2030. Amgen, AstraZeneca and Pfizer are all working on rival medicines.

Investors will be looking for an update on the drug when Novo Nordisk reports its quarterly results on Thursday. Analysts reckon sales of it hit $705m in the first quarter of this year, more than doubling from $336m in the fourth quarter of last year. Investors are also hoping for results of a study into whether the drug reduces the risk of heart attacks and strokes. That could encourage insurers and governments to stump up for the treatment, which would be good for waistlines as well as Novo Nordisk’s bottom line.


England votes in local elections
Local elections in Britain determine how services such as social care and bin collections are run. But they also offer a test of public opinion outside of the general-election cycle.

Contests will take place in England on Thursday involving some 8,000 seats in 230 local authorities. National polls suggest that the opposition Labour Party, led by Sir Keir Starmer, has a 15-point lead over the ruling Conservative Party under the prime minister, Rishi Sunak. That may translate into a big swing to Labour, although that is not guaranteed, since Labour historically underperforms in local elections against their national polling.

The Conservatives have said they expect to lose 1,000 seats. That would be a bad night for the Tories, and would have their MPs worried. If they can limit the damage to 500 losses, they will try to write that off as mid-term blues and hope they can catch up with Labour before a general election expected next year.


PHOTO: CEMAL EMDEN / ISTANBUL MODERN
A museum reopening in Istanbul
Turkey’s best contemporary-art museum reopens on Thursday on the banks of the Bosphorus. Five new exhibitions, including photography by Nuri Bilge Ceylan, a Turkish film director, and works by Turkish female artists, including Selma Gurbuz and Inci Eviner, will be on display at the Istanbul Modern. Visitors will also get another chance to see an installation featuring books suspended from the ceiling by Richard Wentworth, a British artist, as well as new work by Olafur Eliasson, an Icelandic-Danish one.

The Modern’s former home was demolished in 2018 as part of a $1.7bn regeneration of Istanbul’s port district. The new steel and glass building, which resembles containers on a ship, is the first project in Turkey by Renzo Piano, a renowned Italian architect. But its opening was delayed because of problems with a pool of water on its roof—designed, like the building’s glass walls, to feel like an extension of the Bosphorus. Though these days that often means reflections not of water, but of cruise ships docked at a new terminal outside.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: M3gan and Chucky, the subjects of horror movies, are what kind of creature?

Wednesday: What is the name for the process when academic papers are checked by independent experts in the field before publication?

A house without books is like a room without windows.

Horace Mann
