The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (23:47 GMT+1 / 06:47 Hong Kong)

China said it would sever talks with America on defence and climate following the visit of Nancy Pelosi, the speaker of America’s House of Representatives, to Taiwan on Tuesday. On the second day of its most-provocative military drills in decades, which included live-fired missiles over the island, China also sent warships across the Taiwan Strait’s median line on Friday. The White House warned of stumbling into a real conflict.

Sergei Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, said that his country was open to a prisoner swap with America in the case of Brittney Griner. The basketball star, imprisoned in Russia for the possession of drugs, is likely to be exchanged for a Russian arms dealer, Viktor Bout. America also wants the return of Paul Whelan, a marine jailed for espionage.

America’s job growth was unexpectedly strong in July, according to figures from the Labour Department. Employers added 528,000 jobs, taking the level of employment above its pre-pandemic level and assuaging fears that the economy was falling into a recession. The news could give the Federal Reserve more reason to raise interest rates further in its campaign to slow inflation.

Health officials in Britain said there were early signs that the spread of monkeypox was slowing. The country has some 2,900 confirmed cases of the virus, which is similar to smallpox but less fatal. The announcement comes a day after America declared its own monkeypox outbreak a public health emergency, following a similar move by the World Health Organisation.

A jury in Texas decided that Alex Jones, a conspiracy theorist, must pay $45.2m in punitive damages to the parents of a six-year-old boy killed in the Sandy Hook school shooting in 2012. Mr Jones had already been ordered to pay $4.1m in compensatory damages to the plaintiffs, for having pressed the idea that the tragedy was a hoax and that the parents and children were “crisis actors”. He faces several more trials next month, including one in Connecticut, where the shooting occurred.

Israel attacked targets in the Gaza Strip that it said were linked to Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a militant group. Gaza’s health ministry reported that at least eight people had been killed, including a PIJ commander, and a young girl. The Israeli strikes followed rising tension after Israel arrested a PIJ member in the occupied West Bank.

Indonesia’s GDP growth in the second quarter beat expectations, rising 5.44% from a year earlier. South-East Asia’s largest economy was bolstered by its exports, propped up by high global commodity prices, as well as resurgent consumption.

Ganbei, a Chinese term meaning “drink up”. The word is often used when people try to bring up life under China’s covid-19 lockdowns, according to one psychologist. Read the full article.

Republican sentiment grows in Jamaica

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The former British colony’s celebration on Saturday of 60 years of independence will be bittersweet. Many Jamaicans had hoped that by now their country would not only be independent but might have also have removed Britain’s Queen Elizabeth II as its head of state.

Republican sentiment has been growing across the Caribbean (where nine of 13 sovereign island states were once ruled by Britain; other islands remain overseas dependencies). Last year Barbados shed the British monarchy. Jamaica’s government has set out a plan to do the same by 2025. But removing the monarch requires the assent of two-thirds of lawmakers in the lower house and senate, and of citizens in a referendum. That is a tall order. And many Jamaicans see debates about the head of state as of little importance compared with improving the economy and reducing sky-high levels violence. Addressing those may prove even harder.

Twin Town, USA

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
In 1823 the Ohio settlement of Millsville was rechristened Twinsburg in honour of Moses and Aaron Wilcox, identical brothers who donated land and money to the town on the condition it was named after them. In 1976 the town invited twins to visit, capitalising on the name. Now a three-day festival, held this weekend, Twins Days is the largest gathering of the multiple-birthed in the world.

Although the festivities are aimed towards twins, triplets and quads, singletons are welcome too. One highlight is the Double Take Parade—this year’s theme is “Welcome 2 the jungle”, so expect rainforest creatures coming two by two. Twins make great lab rats, too. So amid the look-alike contests, siblings in Twinsburg undergo scientific testing. Identical pairs are used to examine the relationship between genes and environment. One study will look at whether taste is genetically determined. Another takes biometric samples to improve facial recognition technology—identity mix-ups being an issue many twins know only too well.

Sino-American rivalry in the South Pacific

PHOTO: REUTERS
Eighty years after Allied forces landed in the Solomon Islands to confront Japan’s army, a senior American diplomat will visit the Oceanic country in a bid to combat expanding Chinese influence in the Pacific. This weekend Wendy Sherman, the deputy secretary of state, will commemorate the anniversary of the Battle of Guadalcanal and meet Solomon Islands officials, including the prime minister, Manasseh Sogavare.

Mr Sogovare alarmed America and its allies in April by signing a security pact with China, allowing it to send security forces and naval ships to the Solomons. Critics fear that could lead to a Chinese military base. China and the Solomon Islands say they have no such plans, but America and its regional allies, especially Australia, have nonetheless promised more aid and engagement with Pacific Island nations. Ms Sherman’s delegation is also visiting Samoa, Tonga, Australia and New Zealand. At least her island-hopping shouldn’t rattle the Chinese as much as Nancy Pelosi’s did.

In the future everyone will be world-famous for 15 minutes.

Andy Warhol
