The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (22:47 GMT / 06:47 Hong Kong)

In his first public statement since losing Brazil’s presidential election, Jair Bolsonaro made no mention of his defeat to Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, though afterwards an aide said Mr Bolsonaro’s government would comply with the transfer of power. Mr Bolsonaro said those protesting in his support were expressing “injustice” about the vote. But he made no allegations of voter fraud and instructed his supporters to avoid “invading property”.

Exit polls from Israel’s parliamentary election suggested that Binyamin Netanyahu and his allies had won enough seats to form a government, though their narrow lead could still evaporate. The race pitted Mr Netanyahu’s right-wing bloc against the largely centrist and left-wing parties supporting Yair Lapid, the incumbent prime minister. Mr Netanyahu was forced from office in 2021 amid accusations of corruption.

Russia broadened its “evacuation” of occupied southern Ukraine. Vladimir Saldo, the Russian-installed leader of the Kherson region, told 70,000 people living within 15km of the eastern bank of the Dnieper river to flee. The Ukrainian government says the evacuations represent the forced deportation of its citizens. Russia claims that Ukraine is planning to flood parts of Kherson by destroying a dam. Meanwhile, Russian missile attacks continued across Ukraine, with at least one civilian dying in Mykolaiv, a city in the south.

The number of job openings in America rose to 10.7m in September, meaning there are nearly two vacancies for every person seeking work. That is a sign that the Federal Reserve's interest-rate rises have yet to cool the labour market. But monetary tightening seems to have reduced demand for goods: manufacturing activity in October grew at its slowest pace since 2020.

Denmark’s centre-left governing coalition fell several seats short of a parliamentary majority in Tuesday’s election, according to exit polls. That would turn Lars Lokke Rasmussen, a former prime minister whose new centrist party won a projected 17 seats, into a kingmaker. Some suspect he may angle for a broad governing coalition of moderate parties, disrupting the traditional left and right blocs.

Pfizer increased its forecast for sales of its covid-19 vaccine this year by $2bn, assuaging market concerns about weakening demand for pandemic-related medicines. The American pharmaceutical company has said it might continue to raise the price of its vaccine, developed with German firm BioNTech, to offset dips in demand, while stating that sales of its booster jab against the Omicron sub-variant remain healthy.

Uber’s share price leapt by more than a tenth after the ride-sharing firm said quarterly revenues grew by 72% year over year, to $8.3bn. Still, Uber booked a net loss of $1.2bn. Airbnb, meanwhile, had its most lucrative quarter ever, reporting a profit of $1.2bn. Revenues at the home-sharing firm rose by 29% year over year, to $2.9bn.

Fact of the day: 45,000, the estimated number of jobs that American tech firms have shed this year. Read the full story.

Another jumbo rate rise from the Fed

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America’s Federal Reserve is widely expected to raise interest rates by three-quarters of a percentage point on Wednesday, its fourth straight increase of that magnitude. If it does so, the Fed will have lifted short-term rates from a floor of 0% in March to 3.75%, its sharpest tightening since the early 1980s, as it tries to rein in inflation, which is above an annual rate of 8%.

Given that markets have priced in the rate increase, the focus will be on what Jerome Powell, the Fed’s chairman, says in a subsequent news conference. Look for hints about whether he is ready to slow the pace of tightening, perhaps teeing the Fed up for a half-point rate increase at its next meeting in December. But he will also no doubt explain that future decisions depend on data, leaving the Fed wriggle room to deliver yet another jumbo rate rise if inflation remains uncomfortably high.


Africa’s energy problem

PHOTO: ALAMY
This week delegates, lobbyists and bag-carriers begin trickling into Sharm El-Sheikh, in Egypt, for COP27, the United Nations’ annual climate summit. The event, which officially kicks off on Sunday, is being advertised as “Africa’s COP” with a focus on the continent.

As delegates haggle over how to reduce global emissions, they should remember how little energy Africa uses. An average person in sub-Saharan Africa (excluding South Africa) uses about 180kWh a year, less than the average American fridge.

If Africa is to grow richer, its energy use must increase. Renewable energy is essential, but Africa cannot rely on it alone. More gas, which is polluting but cleaner than coal, is needed in the mix. But, despite happily importing fossil fuels, governments in the West mostly now refuse to finance new fossil-fuel projects in Africa or poor countries elsewhere. Those negotiating at COP27 should acknowledge that green growth in the region is a worthwhile goal—but it should not come at the cost of turning on the lights.

Infrastructure disasters in India

PHOTO: AP
Opened in 1879, Jhulto Pul “hanging bridge” was the biggest tourist attraction in Morbi, a Gujarati town. Now it is the site of India’s latest man-made disaster. On October 30th, four days after the pedestrian suspension bridge reopened following maintenance work, its cables snapped, plunging several hundred people into the Machchhu river. On Wednesday Gujarat will mark a day of mourning for the victims.

Oreva, the company which operates the bridge, has blamed people for swaying the walkway. But its employees are among the nine people arrested so far over the collapse. Ahead of state elections in December, opposition parties have alleged corruption over the way Oreva, chiefly a clock-maker, was awarded the bridge contract by the municipality of Morbi and the government of Gujarat, which are controlled by the Bharatiya Janata Party. Narendra Modi, India’s BJP prime minister, has ordered a “detailed and extensive” inquiry. The Supreme Court will open an investigation on November 14th. Indians will not expect much. Post-mortems following similar tragedies have done little to improve governance or shoddy engineering.

A spyware scandal in Greece

PHOTO: REUTERS
Officials from the European Parliament are in Greece on Wednesday to probe whether the ruling party used spyware to illegally snoop on politicians and a journalist. The government of Kyriakos Mitsotakis, the prime minister, has denied that it bought the Israeli-made Predator software (which is similar to the Pegasus spyware used by governments including Mexico and Saudi Arabia). But the reluctance of officials to meet with investigators has fuelled worries that his New Democracy party was involved in an attempt last year to hack the phone of Nikos Androulakis, the leader of Pasok-Kinal, an opposition party.

A Greek parliamentary inquiry ended abruptly last month after government MPs blocked requests by opposition ones to call important witnesses. They included managers at Intellexa, an Israeli-controlled company based in Athens which sold Predator, and Mr Misotakis’s nephew, the then-chief of the cabinet office. The European committee may struggle to untangle such a web. But if it finds evidence that the government was behind the eavesdropping, it could blow up Mr Mitsotakis’s chances of winning a general election next spring.

British prime ministers on screen

PHOTO: ALAMY
In a recent self-promotional video Rishi Sunak, Britain’s prime minister, appears to be modelling himself on the clean-cut, shirt-sleeved occupant of 10 Downing Street played by Hugh Grant in “Love Actually”, a romantic comedy. The slickly produced clip has been mocked online, but there are not many other fictional role models for Mr Sunak to choose from.

Whereas cinema’s American presidents are often noble and brave, British prime ministers on screen are usually self-serving schemers. Francis Urquhart (Ian Richardson) in “House Of Cards” is a Machiavellian murderer; Adam Lang (Pierce Brosnan) in “The Ghost Writer” is a CIA stooge; Vivienne Rook (Emma Thompson) in “Years And Years” is a fascist; and in “Doctor Who” Harold Saxon (John Simm) is the Doctor’s arch-enemy, the Master. A more benign example is Jim Hacker (Paul Eddington) in “Yes, Prime Minister”; he was merely an amiable bungler. British screenwriters rarely make their prime ministers heroes. Given the scandals and upheavals of recent months, that is not likely to change.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which character partnered Ilya Kuryakin in the television series “The Man from Uncle”?

Tuesday: Which American skyscraper was built in 1930-31 to become the world’s tallest building at the time?

Progress is impossible without change; and those who cannot change their minds cannot change anything.

George Bernard Shaw