The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Articles updated 5 hours ago. Audio recorded 3 hours ago
Listen to the briefing
Intense fighting continued around Bakhmut, an eastern Ukrainian city that Russia has sought to capture for almost nine months. America’s defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, said a potential Ukrainian withdrawal could be a mere repositioning and not a “setback”. Earlier, Yevgeny Prigozhin, the head of the Wagner Group of mercenaries, warned that a lack of ammunition could lead to a collapse of Russia’s frontline.

Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, will meet with Kevin McCarthy, speaker of America’s House of Representatives, in California, probably in April. Mr McCarthy has previously promised to visit Taiwan, which fears invasion from China, but now appears reluctant to vex the self-governing island’s neighbour. A trip by his predecessor, Nancy Pelosi, in August 2022 prompted China to fire missiles directly over Taiwan for the first time.

An alliance of six opposition parties in Turkey united behind Kemal Kilicdaroglu as their candidate to stand against President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in elections in May. He leads Turkey’s main opposition party, the secular Republican People’s Party (CHP). Many opposition voters fear Mr Kilicdaroglu—a bookish, soft-spoken former civil servant—is the wrong candidate to take on Turkey’s strongman.

Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, the exiled leader of Belarus’s opposition, received a 15-year sentence for leading protests against Alexander Lukashenko, the country’s dictator, after he claimed victory in a disputed presidential election in 2020. Ms Tikhanovskaya, who fled to Lithuania after that election, was sentenced in absentia on charges of high treason and “conspiracy to seize power”.

The World Bank paused talks about future work with Tunisia over an anti-immigrant tirade by the country’s president. After Kais Saied’s incendiary remarks last month, migrants from west Africa reported an uptick in harassment; many returned home. “Public commentary that stokes…racist violence is completely unacceptable,” said the bank’s boss. Tunisia is negotiating a separate bailout worth $1.9bn with the IMF.

Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s absolute ruler, denounced the suspected poisonings of schoolgirls as an “unforgivable crime” and said, if proven to be deliberate, the culprits should be executed. Since November hundreds of girls in at least 25 of Iran’s 31 provinces have been treated in hospitals. The attacks, which could be an assault on female education, have sparked widespread anger in a country shaken by months of anti-regime protests.

Credit Suisse’s former main backer, Harris Associates, sold its shares in the Swiss bank. Last August the American investment firm held around 10% of Credit Suisse’s stock, but it has gradually divested as the embattled lender continues to lose clients and cash. In February Credit Suisse reported its largest annual loss since the financial crisis in 2008; it has launched a major overhaul to limber up its business.

Fact of the day: 400, the number of ships expected to be in China’s navy, the largest in the world, by 2025. Read the full story.

Correction: An earlier version of the World in Brief incorrectly introduced Binyamin Netanyahu as Israel’s president. He is, of course, the country’s prime minister. Sorry.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
An export anomaly in China
China’s official statistics are often suspected of flattering the economy. But its balance-of-payments figures may actually understate the size of the country’s pandemic-era export boom. Last year they showed a current-account surplus of 2.3% of GDP, the highest figure in 14 years. But China’s customs data suggests the surplus was even bigger: over 3%, according to Adam Wolfe of Absolute Strategy Research, a consultancy.

Chinese authorities point out that the two sources of data have different ways of handling some transactions in and out of China’s special trade zones. But Mr Wolfe is unconvinced that this can account for such a big discrepancy.

Still, the anomaly may subside before it is solved. Thanks to weak global demand and a strengthening domestic economy, China’s surplus is shrinking. Customs figures released on Tuesday are expected to show that exports fell in the first two months of the year compared with a year earlier. That would be the fourth such fall in a row.


PHOTO: ALAMY
The green-hydrogen economy takes shape
On Tuesday Sunfire, a German startup, will open Europe’s first large-scale production line for electrolysers, devices that use electricity to split water into oxygen and hydrogen, in Solingen, a city in western Germany. There is growing interest in using hydrogen to replace fossil fuels, as it is a clean substance that can be made from a variety of primary energy sources. The industrialisation of electrolysers powered by renewable energy is key to making this green-hydrogen economy a reality.

The opening of Sunfire’s production line shows that the European Union, which wants to ramp up annual production of green hydrogen from almost nothing today to 10m tonnes by 2030, has a lead in the sector. But others are catching up fast. As part of its Inflation Reduction Act, America’s government will subsidise green hydrogen with tax credits to the tune of up to $3 per kg. That should turbocharge production. It would not come as a surprise if Sunfire opened its next factory across the Atlantic.


PHOTO: ALAMY
South Africa’s dismal economy
New GDP figures for South Africa on Tuesday are expected to show that the economy shrunk in the final quarter of 2022 by around 0.4%. If so, blame two failing state-run firms eviscerated by corruption and mismanagement. Eskom, which is meant to provide electricity, implemented more forced blackouts in 2022 than any other year. Transnet, which is meant to keep freight moving, carried fewer goods on its rail network than at any time since the second world war, according to one metric.

The combined impact of the two companies’ failings has been a reduction in the potential output of mines, manufacturers and other businesses. Cyril Ramaphosa, South Africa’s president, who took power in 2018 promising economic reform, promises finally to get a grip of the crisis. A cabinet reshuffle on Monday may mean marginally less incompetent ministers. But it will take more than that to turn South Africa around.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Sunak’s asylum plan
On Tuesday Rishi Sunak, Britain’s prime minister, is expected to unveil plans designed to stop migrants travelling across the English Channel in small boats. The rising number of migrants—many from Afghanistan and Iran—making the perilous journey from the French coast is a political headache for Mr Sunak’s government. Last year a record 45,755 people were counted as arriving this way, many of them claiming asylum. The numbers are expected to rise this year.

Mr Sunak is likely to propose legislation that would render inadmissible asylum claims from migrants arriving in small boats. Claimants would instead be detained and deported. This raises two obvious problems. Britain does not have the capacity to lock up more than a few thousand migrants at a time. And deporting them to countries deemed unsafe would violate international law. A plan to send asylum-seekers to Rwanda, a country Britain deems “safe” despite its repressive government, is stuck in the courts. Mr Sunak’s plan seems likely to meet the same fate.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Margaret Atwood’s understated humanity
An alien tells folk tales to survivors of a plague apocalypse; two elderly sisters return to a childhood retreat, surrounded by mice and memories. Margaret Atwood’s latest short-story collection, “Old Babes in the Wood”, exemplifies the dizzying scope of the Canadian writer’s career. Published on Tuesday, the collection is Ms Atwood’s first fiction since “The Testaments”, a Booker-prizewinning novel published in 2019, and her first story collection since 2014.

The volume’s characters include George Orwell, Hypatia of Alexandria, and a snail. But for all its apparent eclecticism, “Old Babes in the Wood” has a powerful unifying theme. Many of the stories explore grief and ageing. Ms Atwood, who is 83 years old and lost her partner, Graeme Gibson, in 2019, bookends her collection with multiple tales about a couple’s long-shared life, and their separation by death. Readers will encounter plenty of Atwoodian wit, quirkiness and dystopia—along with a deep, understated humanity.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Tuesday: Which syndicated cartoon strip features a small boy and his stuffed tiger?

Monday: Which crime-fighting lawyer suffered two narrow defeats when he ran for President on the Republican ticket in 1944 and 1948?

Reason in man is rather like God in the world.

Thomas Aquinas
