The world in brief
April 11, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

America appears to have been eavesdropping on key allies, according to classified-intelligence documents that were leaked online. South Korea, one of those affected, played down talk of tension, maintaining that its ties with America remain “strong”. South Korean companies may be indirectly supplying lethal weapons to Ukraine, the documents show, contrary to official policy. The files also seem to reveal national-security information about Russia’s invasion, as well as about China, the Indo-Pacific and the Middle East. America’s Justice Department has opened an investigation into the leak.

America’s Justice Department appealed against a ruling issued by a federal judge in Texas to suspend the approval of mifepristone, an abortion medication. The judge’s order, which came on Friday, was not set to take effect for seven days. The government also asked the federal appeals court to pause the judge’s order until the appeal is decided. The pill has been used by millions of Americans since 2000.

China began a third day of military drills around Taiwan, including a simulated attack from the east. Taiwan’s defence ministry said 70 planes flew into the island’s Air Defence Identification Zone, a buffer region, during the 24 hours to Monday morning. Nearby Japan scrambled jets in response. China is furious that Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, met Kevin McCarthy, the speaker of America’s House of Representatives, last week.

America’s State Department designated Evan Gershkovich, the Wall Street Journal reporter jailed in Russia, as “wrongfully detained”. The official classification—which typically takes months to secure—shifts Mr Gershkovich’s case to a specific State Department section and expands the government’s authority to secure a release. Mr Gershkovich was arrested on March 29th and subsequently charged with espionage; the Wall Street Journal denies the allegations.

Fox News said it had “amicably” settled a defamation case brought by a Venezuelan businessman. Majed Khalil sued the conservative American cable network for accusing him on air, falsely he said, of helping to rig America’s presidential election in 2020. Fox News faces another defamation suit brought by Dominion Voting Systems, which is seeking $1.6bn in damages.

SenseTime, a Chinese AI startup, unveiled the latest challenger to ChatGPT, a generative AI model developed by OpenAI, an American startup. The debutant model, SenseNova, draws on vast data and is accessible to users through a chatbot called SenseChat. Its makers showed off its code-writing abilities and prompted it to invent a children’s story about a cat catching a fish.

The world’s most expensive number plate was sold for 55m dirhams ($15m) at a government food-aid auction in Dubai. It bears the digit “7” preceded by a smaller letter “P”. The buyer, whose identity was not disclosed, beat the previous record set in 2008 by an Emirati businessman, who paid 52.2m dirhams for a plate with the lone letter “1”.

Fact of the day: 90%, the share of family businesses in the world’s enterprises. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Biden’s brief stop in Belfast
On Tuesday President Joe Biden arrives in Belfast to mark the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement, which largely ended sectarian violence in Northern Ireland. He faces some thorny diplomacy. Mr Biden will greet leaders of Northern Ireland’s five political parties; one, the Democratic Unionist Party, has since February 2022 boycotted the power-sharing government over a post-Brexit agreement that put a customs border in the Irish sea. Mr Biden supports a freshly-negotiated trade deal (which the DUP still finds insufficient) and has urged for the restoration of the assembly. He sees both as critical to preserving the hard-won peace.

Next comes a three-day homecoming. Mr Biden’s itinerary includes stops in Ireland’s County Louth and County Mayo, where he has family roots. The town of Ballina, from where his great-great-grandfather left for America, already boasts a mural of the president. He would not be the first American president to revel in a warm Irish greeting. President John F. Kennedy called his own trip to his homeland, in 1963, the “best four days” of his life.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The IMF’s forecast for the global economy
For some time fear of a world economic downturn has been widespread. Yet the most recent business surveys suggest stronger-than-expected global growth in the first quarter of 2023. The International Monetary Fund will weigh up the good and the bad when it updates its economic forecasts on Tuesday. The most important question that the fund faces is how much growth will suffer from the tighter monetary policy implemented by central banks to fight inflation.

In its last projections, in January, the fund predicted that the world economy would expand by 2.9% in 2023, less than its long-run average of 3.8%. Since then higher interest rates have brought about a banking crisis that might yet squeeze America’s economy by making credit harder to come by. Investors now expect central bankers to be more cautious about raising rates. But, although the latest data have brought good news about growth, they also show that the world’s inflation problem has not gone away.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China’s questionable economic recovery
Not everyone is convinced by China’s seemingly fast economic rebound. Exports, once a source of strength, have been disappointing recently: empty shipping containers are piling up in China’s ports. Carmakers are slashing prices. Nervous households are prepaying mortgages to reduce debt. Sales of excavators for construction are plummeting.

Over the next eight days China will release economic figures that could either confirm or allay these doubts. Optimists are expecting the numbers to show that retail sales grew by more than 8% year-over-year in March, before adjusting for inflation. They also believe that property sales improved. GDP for the first quarter could be 4% higher in real terms than a year earlier, implying a quick rebound from the last quarter of 2022. And inflation figures, which are released on Tuesday, should show very little price pressure. That leaves room for further policy stimulus. If the data cannot dispel doubts about China’s recovery, policymakers will have to dispel them instead.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Lula’s delayed visit to China
Brazil’s left-leaning president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, will visit his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, on Tuesday. The biggest-ever Brazilian delegation to China—originally featuring dozens of legislators and 240 business representatives—was scheduled to travel in March, but the trip was postponed because Lula contracted pneumonia. The two leaders quickly set a new date. China is Brazil’s biggest trading partner and the destination for more than a quarter of its exports by value. The two countries are expected to sign at least 20 agreements, covering such areas as investment in renewable energy and co-operation on science and technology.

In his two previous terms as Brazil’s president, from 2003 to 2010, Lula maintained good relationships with both China and America. In February this year he made Washington the destination of his first official trip outside Latin America during his current term as president. But as tensions mount between America and China, Brazil’s commitment to non-alignment will be tested like never before.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America and the Philippines deter China
America and the Philippines will begin their annual joint military exercises in the archipelagic country on Tuesday. These are the biggest manoeuvres yet; some 17,600 service personnel from the allied countries will take part. Their size reflects the perception in Washington and Manila that the Chinese threat to the independence of Taiwan, a self-governing island, is growing.

America is committed to protecting Taiwan. The Philippines, thanks to its proximity to Taiwan and long-standing ties to America, could serve as a launchpad for a defence of the southern side of the island. As the Philippine role in security becomes more prominent, China has been stealthily projecting its might southwards. Chinese militiamen have anchored large fishing boats in disputed parts of the South China Sea, getting in the way of Philippine vessels. During their exercises, the American and Philippine troops plan to blow an equivalent boat out of the water for target practice. That will also serve as a warning to China.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Tuesday: Which river, with a source in the Adirondack mountains, flows into New York’s harbour?

Monday: Aristotle founded his school of philosophy in which Athenian temple?

We are what we pretend to be, so we must be careful about what we pretend to be.

Kurt Vonnegut
