The world in brief
August 8, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The Economic Community of West African States, a regional bloc, said that it would hold a summit in Abuja, Nigeria’s capital, on Thursday, to discuss the coup in Niger. Earlier Niger’s ruling junta shut the country’s airspace and warned of an attack by “a foreign power”. ECOWAS had threatened military intervention should Niger’s coup leaders fail to allow President Mohamed Bazoum to return to office by Sunday, but the deadline passed without incident. Mali and Burkina Faso, both of which are ruled by their armies, will send a joint delegation to Niger to express “solidarity” with its new leaders.

Yellow, an American trucking company, filed for bankruptcy and said it would sell “all or substantially all” of its assets. By the end of March the 99-year-old firm’s outstanding debt topped $1bn. Darren Hawkins, the company’s boss, said that Yellow intends to pay back “in full” the $700m pandemic-relief loan it received from the federal government in 2020. The company’s closure will affect 30,000 employees.

Voters in the Central African Republic backed constitutional changes scrapping a limit on presidential terms, according to the country’s electoral authority. If ratified, the proposed new law would enable the country’s president, Faustin Archange Touadéra, who hosts the mercenary Wagner Group, to seek re-election in 2025. Critics said that turnout in the referendum might have been as low as 10%.

Paramount will sell Simon & Schuster, a book publisher, to KKR, a private-equity firm, for $1.6bn. The all-cash deal ended Paramount’s three-year search for a buyer. In November Paramount terminated a $2.2bn agreement to sell Simon & Schuster to Penguin Random House, another publishing house, after America’s justice department sued to block the merger.

Siemens Energy reported a net loss of €2.9bn ($3.2bn) for its third quarter and predicted it would lose a total of €4.5bn this year. The firm said that the poor third-quarter results were in part due to rising costs in its wind-turbine division. Siemens Gamesa, like other makers of wind turbines, has been hard hit by supply-chain disruptions and increased maintenance expenses.

At least 11 migrants are dead and 44 missing after a shipwreck on Tunisia’s coast on Sunday, according to a Tunisian official. Only two people were rescued. Tunisian authorities said that all of the migrants were from sub-Saharan countries. The number of people travelling from or through the north African country to Europe has surged in recent months.

Russia announced that it would launch its first lunar mission in nearly 50 years on Friday. Lunar-25, Russia’s rover, is expected to land on the moon’s south pole, an area which scientists believe could hold significant quantities of ice. India launched a rival mission in July. Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, said that his country would develop its space programme “despite” Western sanctions.

Figure of the day: $2m, the amount that national Democratic groups spent in Florida in last year’s midterm campaign, down from nearly $60m in 2018. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Pakistan’s political uncertainty continues
This week Shehbaz Sharif, Pakistan’s prime minister, is expected to dissolve parliament and appoint a caretaker government ahead of a general election later this year. The election will probably be delayed, after the government said on Saturday that the electorate would reflect a new census. The authorities expect to take up to four months to redraw constituencies. So parliament granted additional powers to the future caretaker government, allowing it to implement the conditions of a loan agreement with the IMF.

Elections—whenever held—will likely be conducted without Imran Khan, a previous prime minister. His conviction at the weekend for “corrupt practices” disqualifies him from parliament for five years. Mr Khan’s lawyers said they will appeal. But he faces dozens of other charges including blasphemy and terrorism. With his status having sunk in one parliamentary term from prime minister to that of a convict banned from politics, Mr Khan is the latest to learn the unforgiving nature of Pakistani politics.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
SoftBank avoids another hard landing
SoftBank, a Japanese investment giant, reports its quarterly results on Tuesday. The company has had a tough time of late. The collapse of the tech industry shrank the value of many of its big bets. The Vision Fund, its venture-capital unit, has lost ¥6.9trn ($48bn) over the past two years.

But analysts expect the fund to have made a profit in the latest quarter, largely because excitement around artificial intelligence may have lifted the value of its investments in tech startups. AI has helped raise the Nasdaq composite, a tech-heavy index, by 33% this year. Another boost for SoftBank will come from the initial public offering of Arm, a British firm that produces the blueprints for many semiconductors. SoftBank bought Arm in 2016 for $32bn. Its valuation target is predicted to be $60bn-$70bn, with a listing possibly as soon as September. Tuesday’s earnings may reveal more clues about what could be a blockbuster IPO.


PHOTO: AP
The European housing market
Is it time to invest in European housing again? House prices have probably bottomed out. Figures for the first three months of 2023 showed a quarterly decline in many European countries. But prices in Germany increased in the second quarter, and other countries may follow. With inflation mostly coming down, interest rates and hence mortgage rates could drop, too. That might tempt buyers. On Tuesday, the European Central Bank releases its latest survey on what consumers think of house prices, and their predictions for the wider economy.

In the surveys in April and May, the median consumer had expected stagnating house prices and household incomes for the next 12 months, anticipating that mortgage rates would remain at 4.5% over the same period. Inflation has slowed further since, which would usually bring down interest rates. But markets are unconvinced: rates went up a notch for both short and longer term debt. For homebuyers deciding when to move, getting the timing right will not be easy.



PHOTO: AP
Ohio decides how to decide
On Tuesday Ohioans vote on whether to make their constitution harder to change. The Republican state legislature put an amendment on the ballot in May. It would require future citizen-led campaigns to collect signatures from every county in the state, rather than just half, to secure a ballot. It would also raise the threshold to pass an amendment from a simple majority to 60%.


Some state Republicans have been open about their motives for the timing of the proposal. Ohioans vote in November on whether to introduce a right to an abortion into their constitution. Since the overturning of Roe v Wade last year, six states have voted on abortion. In each, voters have protected access to it, but in Michigan, Kansas and Kentucky the abortion-rights campaign won with less than 60% of the vote. Activists in Ohio are litigating against a six-week abortion ban, passed in 2019. In Ohio the battle over abortion access is being fought in the courts and on the ballots, too.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Jamie Lee Curtis’s environmental horror story
On Tuesday Jamie Lee Curtis, an Oscar-winning actress, publishes a graphic novel, “Mother Nature”, co-written with Russell Goldman and illustrated in photo-realistic watercolour by Karl Stevens. Ms Curtis rose to fame at 19 in a slasher film, “Halloween”. At that age—recognising what she calls the “unbalanced relationship between humans and nature”—she began conjuring up a dark plot in which nature retaliates. Now she has brought it to life with gory graphics, featuring skull-shattering hailstorms, a man impaled by a pumpjack and deadly tornadoes.

Through a plot that involves environmental cover-ups and supernatural vengeance, the fossil-fuel industry (in the shape of the fictitious Cobalt Corporation) is turned into a comic-book villain. “Mother Nature” is being released during a summer of extreme, and deadly, weather conditions. The story uses bloody violence typical of the horror genre to engage readers who might otherwise be apathetic about the environment. Curtis has teased she might play the dastardly boss of Cobalt in a film adaptation.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: What is the Latin word for “right” as in “turn right”?

Monday: Which song, named after a supposed martyr, was the anthem of the Nazi party?

Smiling without good reason is demeaning.

Ellen Raskin
