The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (23:04 GMT+1 / 06:04 Hong Kong)

After only 45 days in office Liz Truss resigned, becoming the shortest-serving prime minister in British history. She stepped down under pressure from her own Conservative Party MPs following a series of chaotic political missteps, starting with the disastrous “mini-budget” of September 23rd. She will stay in office while the party holds a leadership election, to be completed by October 28th. Rishi Sunak, her rival in the leadership race earlier this year, is expected to run; some MPs are openly canvassing for the return of her predecessor, Boris Johnson.

The EU agreed on new sanctions on Iran over its supply of “kamikaze” drones to Russia, which it used to damage Ukrainian energy infrastructure. Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said that air strikes had destroyed 30% of the country’s power plants, necessitating limits on electricity usage. Meanwhile Russian-appointed officials in the southern city of Kherson said they had evacuated 5,000 civilians, with plans to move up to 60,000 people, amid fears of a Ukrainian counter-offensive.

Elon Musk told prospective backers of his bid for Twitter that he would sack nearly three-quarters of its 7,500 staff, according to the Washington Post. Mr Musk reportedly said that swingeing job cuts would mark the first step in his shake-up of the social-media firm, whose profits lag behind those of its competitors. His purchase is expected to close by October 28th.

Snap’s share price fell by more than one-quarter in post-session trading, wiping off over $4bn in market value, after it reported its slowest revenue growth since going public five years ago. The social-media firm warned that revenues in the last three months of 2022 would be flat compared with the same period last year. Snap relies on digital advertisers, who are retrenching amid a global economic downturn.

Hans Moke Niemann, the 19-year-old American embroiled in a chess-cheating scandal, sued Magnus Carlsen and others in federal court for defamation and colluding to harm his career. Mr Niemann alleges that Mr Carlsen, the reigning world champion, falsely accused him of cheating after losing a match, then blacklisted him from top tournaments. He is seeking $100m in damages.

Philip Morris, the maker of Marlboro cigarettes, has raised its offer to buy Swedish Match to SKr116 ($10.34) per share from Skr106. Swedish Match produces oral nicotine pouches which are the world’s fastest-growing alternative-nicotine category. PMI, which has pledged to “deliver on a smoke-free future”, is trying to finalise a $15.8bn takeover torpedoed by hedge funds seeking a higher bid.

At least 50 people were killed by security forces in Chad during a banned anti-government protest in the capital, N’Djamena. The African country descended into chaos after its president of 30 years, Idriss Déby, was killed last year and replaced by a transitional military council led by his son. The military pushed back Chad’s democratic transition by two years from its promised deadline on Thursday.

Fact of the day: 15%, the percentage of patients where antidepressants had a substantial benefit beyond a placebo. Read the story.

Britain awaits a new prime minister

PHOTO: EPA
The merry-go-round of Downing Street turns again. Liz Truss, who resigned on Thursday as Britain’s prime minister, will be remembered as the shortest and arguably least successful holder of that office. After bond markets rejected her “mini-budget”, she fired her chancellor, reneged on her promise of tax cuts and lost her authority.

The Conservative Party will now embark on an expedited leadership contest to be completed in the course of the next week. Tory MPs will whittle down a list of hopefuls—who will need support from 100 colleagues to qualify—before putting two to party members to choose from. Likely candidates include Rishi Sunak, the former chancellor; Penny Mordaunt, the leader of the House of Commons; and Boris Johnson, the scandal-prone former prime minister. The winner will be the party’s fifth prime minister since taking office in 2010, and the third this calendar year. But whoever triumphs will face the same old problems: constrained finances and a nigh-on ungovernable party.

Steve Bannon faces the music

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Friday Steve Bannon, Donald Trump’s former consigliere, will be sentenced by a judge in Washington for contempt of Congress. In July he was convicted of two misdemeanours for refusing to appear before a House committee investigating the Capitol riot on January 6th 2021. Prosecutors have asked that he serve six months in prison and pay a $200,000 fine. They cited his “name calling, mimicry and menacing rhetoric” towards the committee members, and his lack of remorse.

The contempt-of-Congress statute is rarely enforced. Just one other person—Peter Navarro, a former adviser to Mr Trump—was indicted for thumbing his nose at the January 6th committee, though several higher-level aides also ignored subpoenas. Justice-department guidelines suggest that senior administration officials and the president should not be forced to testify before Congress, owing to executive privilege. So do not expect contempt charges for Mr Trump if, as is expected, he disregards his own forthcoming subpoena.

An LNG jam at European ports

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As the European Union races to restock gas supplies ahead of the winter, it has increasingly relied on liquefied natural gas ferried by super-chilled tankers, often from America, to replace the stuff piped from Russia. That has helped it fill its storage to more than 90%, already passing its target of 80% for November 1st.

But now a bottleneck is choking off flows. With the continent’s limited number of regasifying terminals now running at full capacity, dozens of tankers are being forced to wait their turn. Many are circling off the coasts of Spain, which accounts for one-third of Europe’s regasification capacity, but may soon start looking for other destinations. To avoid missing the boat, next year Spain will reopen El Musel, an LNG import terminal in the Bay of Biscay that has been idle for a decade. But more bottlenecks will appear upstream: the pipeline linking Iberia to northern Europe will not satiate Germany’s hunger for gas.


Italy edges closer to its new government

PHOTO: REUTERS
A delegation from the right-wing alliance that won Italy’s general election last month will visit president Sergio Mattarella on Friday, rounding off the consultations that precede the formation of a new government. Usually, each party sends its own delegation. But the uneasy allies want to showcase their unity and readiness to govern in coalition under Giorgia Meloni, who leads the hard-right Brothers of Italy party.

The only fly in the ointment appears to be Silvio Berlusconi, who leads the Forza Italia party. Irate at being thwarted in the share-out of cabinet seats, the former prime minister has wrought havoc. In a recording leaked on Wednesday he embarrassed Ms Meloni by boasting of his closeness to Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. After Mr Berlusconi’s tantrum Mr Mattarella will doubtless want answers to some hard questions: about whether the right is as united as it claims, and whether Mr Berlusconi’s party should, as reportedly intended, get the foreign-affairs portfolio.

The melancholy wit of “The Banshees Of Inisherin”

PHOTO: AP
Martin McDonagh’s last comedy drama, “Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri”, won the BAFTA for Best Film, among other awards, in 2018. The playwright-turned-filmmaker’s darkly funny follow-up, which is released in cinemas on Friday, “The Banshees Of Inisherin”, is too mysterious and melancholy to earn as many prizes. Yet it is sure to win a cult following.

Mr McDonagh has recast the stars of his debut movie, “In Bruges”, Colin Farrell and Brendan Gleeson. The pair play old drinking buddies who live on a tiny Irish island in 1923. Their friendship comes to an abrupt halt when one of them suddenly announces that he will chop off his own fingers if he ever has to talk to the other again. That succinct, absurdist plot is all that Mr McDonagh needs to make a poetic, sharply scripted and beautifully acted meditation on kindness, depression, art, the Irish Civil War—and the self-destructive stubbornness of men everywhere.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which famous river has two major tributaries, the White and the Blue?

Thursday: Which newspaper group was acquired by crooked businessman Robert Maxwell in July 1984?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Sudhir Babu, Bengaluru, India

North America: Jane N. Gose, Kihei, Hawaii

Central and South America: Sebastian Agudelo-Restrepo, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic

Europe: Anton Grui, Kyiv, Ukraine

Africa: Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya

Oceania: Roberta MacDonald, Runaway Bay, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Ali Khamenei, Amazon, Andes and import. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

We read books to find out who we are.

Ursula Le Guin
