The world in brief
June 9, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Donald Trump said he had been indicted for mishandling classified documents at Mar-a-Lago, his estate in Florida, in a post on Truth Social, the social-media site he started. America’s Justice Department did not confirm the charges, which would be the first to be brought by federal prosecutors against a former president. (Mr Trump faces a separate criminal indictment, filed by local prosecutors in New York.) According to media reports, the charges—reportedly on seven counts—were filed by Jack Smith, the special counsel who is also investigating Mr Trump’s election-interference activities. Mr Trump says he is due to report to court in Miami on Tuesday.

President Volodymyr Zelensky visited Kherson, a region in south-east Ukraine flooded by the partial destruction of the Kakhovka dam. He thanked volunteers for evacuating 4,000 people from endangered areas. Ukrainian officials reported that dozens of settlements have been submerged, leaving people stranded on their rooftops and without drinking water. Authorities say at least 40,000 people must be relocated. Russia and Ukraine have accused each other of shelling those trying to escape.

Ukraine launched attacks along the front line in Zaporizhia, a province in the country’s south-east. Hanna Maliar, the deputy defence minister, said Russian forces were “actively on the defensive” around Orikhiv, a city in the region. Russia denied that Ukraine had achieved any breakthroughs; Sergei Shoigu, Russia’s defence minister, said his army had dealt a “preventive blow” to Ukrainian troops in the region.

Millions of Americans were urged to stay indoors as thick smoke from wildfires in Canada drifted farther down America’s east coast. Several big theatre performances and baseball games were cancelled as the New York City region recorded its worst-ever air quality. Readings in Toronto, Canada and Syracuse, in upstate New York, were similarly high-risk. Flights bound for New York City-area airports were temporarily grounded.

In a surprise decision, America’s Supreme Court ruled that Alabama had diluted the power of black voters by re-drawing its congressional map to consolidate them in a single district. The 5-4 opinion orders Alabama to create a second black-majority voting district. The decision bucks the court’s recent trend of narrowing the scope of the federal Voting Rights Act, which protects minority voters.

Six people, including four children, were injured in a knife attack in Annecy, a town in south-east France. The police have arrested the suspected assailant, a 31-year-old Syrian man with refugee status in Sweden. Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, said the victims were “between life and death”, and called the assault an “act of absolute cowardice”.

The economy of the euro zone shrank by 0.1% in the first quarter of 2023, according to downwardly revised data released on Thursday. That puts the currency area into a recession, defined as two consecutive quarters of negative growth. But, the downturn is unlikely to last too long: the European Commission forecasts that the region’s GDP will expand by 1.1% this year.

Figure of the day: 20m, the approximate number of people that travel by rail in India each day. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China’s faltering recovery
China’s state-owned enterprises have weathered the country’s recent economic setbacks better than most firms. Their pay and profits have been relatively resilient. That may help explain the fierce online outrage this week when the boss of a state-owned engineering firm in Beijing was photographed breezily out shopping with a young woman holding his hand. Overall, consumer confidence is still weak and retail sales disappointing, though both have recovered a little this year.

How should policymakers respond to China’s faltering recovery? Elsewhere, central bankers’ hands are tied by high inflation, which obliges them to keep monetary policy tight. But in China inflation is dangerously low. Data out later on Friday are likely to show that consumer prices barely rose year-on-year in May. This week China’s big banks said they would cut interest rates on many deposits. That could pave the way for the central bank to lower the interest rate on loans. Meanwhile the interest in scandals seems strong.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Progress in treating Alzheimer’s
Carers for the 6.7m Americans currently living with Alzheimer’s, the most common cause of dementia, should pay close attention to a meeting on Friday of a committee of the Food and Drug Administration. It may grant “traditional” approval to Leqembi (a brand name for lecanemab), a drug produced by Eisai of Japan and America’s Biogen. Leqembi won “accelerated” approval in January.

The change is more than semantic: it would mean that the FDA accepts that Leqembi offers proven clinical benefits—ie, that it actually slows cognitive decline. The earlier approval—like one granted two years ago to Aduhelm (aducanamab), another drug—was based on its effectiveness in attacking a build-up of protein plaques in the brain, a possible cause of Alzheimer’s. Traditional approval would also unlock coverage from both Medicare (federal health-insurance for the elderly) and private insurers. With Eli Lilly, a pharmaceutical giant, hoping to win approval for a similar medicine this year, glimmers of hope are at last flickering for those with early-stage Alzheimer’s.


PHOTO: AP
Russia’s surprising economic stability
Following its latest monetary-policy meeting on Friday, Russia’s central bank is expected to leave interest rates at 7.5%—their pre-war level. Not long ago such loose monetary policy would have been unthinkable. When Russia invaded Ukraine in February 2022 the rouble tanked, causing inflation to spike. The central bank quickly raised rates to an astonishing 20%.

Even with this extraordinary policy in place, many were surprised by how quickly inflation subsequently came down. The rouble stabilised. Inflation expectations, which had mounted, fell once more. That has allowed the central bank to cut rates aggressively, supporting the economy. Energy prices, pushed up by the war, have fallen in recent months but, according to “real-time” data on everything from business confidence to consumer surveys, Russia’s GDP is growing about as quickly as before the pandemic—not fast, but considerably faster than expected. The Russian economy is poorer than it was before February 2022. But it is, against the odds, stable.



PHOTO: GETTY/REUTERS
Republicans converge in North Carolina
This weekend in Greensboro, North Carolina, Republicans hoping to lead the state will rub shoulders with those hoping to govern the country. The North Carolina Republican party is hosting its annual convention of GOP candidates for local, state, and national office. The speaking slots are much coveted—and prime podium time is carefully allocated.

Ron DeSantis, the Republican presidential candidate who is polling in second place, will address the Old North State dinner on Friday. Mike Pence, a former vice-president who jumped into the race on Wednesday, gets Saturday’s First in Freedom lunch. But the best speaking spot, at the Grand Old Party dinner on Saturday, will go to Donald Trump, who won North Carolina in the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections.

Republicans have so far been cautious about criticising the former president but—now that the field is growing more crowded—an elbow or two has emerged. Expect things to get rougher. As Mr Trump said recently, “this is a war of a certain kind”.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Saudi Arabia plays the long game
After the golfing merger between the PGA Tour in America, the DP World Tour in Europe and the Saudi-funded LIV Golf on Wednesday, where will Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern governments invest next? The merger certainly represents an intensification of Saudi’s sports-investment programme. Although buying Premier League football clubs (such as Newcastle United) is expensive, taking control of an entire sport is a much more ambitious enterprise. That is what the merger amounts to: the PGA Tour has bent to the Saudi Public Investment Fund’s wishes.

Middle Eastern countries will continue to persuade fading footballers based in Europe—such as Christiano Ronaldo, though not Lionel Messi—to play in their domestic leagues. Saudi Arabia remains determined to bid for the 2030 football World Cup. It also has a long-standing interest in launching a short-format cricket franchise that would be richer even than the Indian Premier League. The lesson from golf is that, no matter how vociferous the protest and disavowals, money eventually makes things happen.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which spring festival in Japan is known as hanami?

Thursday: Which was the first company to reach a market capitalisation of $1 trillion?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Richard Abas, Petaling Jaya, Malaysia

Kate MacMillan, Orleans, Massachusetts, America

Corien Kershey, Ottawa, Canada

They all gave the correct answers of Armageddon, Album, Gold, Nobel. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions.

David Hume
