The world in brief
September 19, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Canada expelled a top Indian diplomat after Justin Trudeau, the prime minister, said there were “credible allegations” that Indian government agents were involved in the killing of Hardeep Singh Nijjar, a Sikh leader who was shot in British Columbia in June. Mr Trudeau told the House of Commons that he raised the issue—which he described as “an unacceptable violation” of Canadian sovereignty—personally with Narendra Modi, the prime minister of India, at the recent G20 summit. Mr Nijjar, who was a Canadian citizen, supported the idea of a Khalistani state as a Sikh homeland, and was labelled a “terrorist” by the Indian government.

Iran released five Americans in a prisoner swap mediated by Qatar. In exchange for the hostages, all of whom are American-Iranian dual nationals, the Biden administration agreed to unfreeze $6bn of Iran’s oil revenue, which has been held in South Korea since sanctions were tightened in 2018. America will also release five Iranians, two of whom are expected to return to their homeland. America and Iran have recently been trying to de-escalate the tensions between them, particularly over Iran’s nuclear programme.

Ukraine removed six deputy defence ministers amid efforts to reshape the defence ministry, which has been dogged by allegations of corruption. Meanwhile, a Ukrainian spokesperson said that the country’s forces had recaptured two villages south of Bakhmut, a Russian-occupied town. Ukraine’s counter-offensive has made slow progress, but Volodymyr Zelensky, the country’s president, said his troops were making gains “step by step”.

Hunter Biden, President Joe Biden’s son, sued the Internal Revenue Service, America’s tax agency, alleging that it had violated his privacy. The suit claims that IRS agents targeted Hunter by leaking his tax returns to the media. Last week federal prosecutors charged Hunter with lying about his drug use when buying a gun; he is also expected to be charged with not paying taxes.

Italy extended the maximum amount of time that its officials can detain migrants from 135 days to 18 months. The country’s far-right government is struggling to fulfil its campaign promise to curb migration; almost 10,000 migrants arrived on Lampedusa, an Italian island, last week. Earlier, Austria said that it would introduce emergency controls on its border with Italy.

Ukraine registered a complaint at the World Trade Organisation against three neighbouring countries over their banning of Ukrainian agricultural produce. Hungary, Poland and Slovakia imposed their own embargoes after an EU ban—introduced earlier this year after farmers complained that Ukrainian imports were causing prices to plummet—ended last Friday. Several countries, including Germany and France, criticised the unilateral embargoes.

An American air force base in South Carolina appealed to the public for help finding a missing fighter jet. Officials said that they lost track of the F-35, a fifth-generation jet, after a “mishap” caused its pilot to eject above the southern state on Sunday afternoon. Current models of F-35s, which are known for their stealth capabilities, cost around $80m depending on specifications.

Figure of the day: 393,000, the number of Italian babies born last year. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Zelensky appears at the UNGA
Ukraine’s president will steal the show at the United Nations General Assembly in New York. In 2022 Volodymyr Zelensky addressed his fellow world leaders via video. This time he will appear in person—trying, on Tuesday, to rally support for his peace plan and blame the war and its violation of international law on the absent Vladimir Putin. (Joe Biden is the only leader of the five permanent members of the Security Council attending the UNGA.)

To a certain extent, Mr Zelenksy will be preaching to the choir: in February 141 UN members supported a resolution calling for the immediate withdrawal of Russian forces from Ukraine (seven voted against and 32 abstained). But many leaders from poorer countries would rather the UNGA focus on the UN Sustainable Development Goals. The pandemic and the war have slowed progress on targets for 2030, now at their halfway point. The UNGA’s split priorities will be on display for the world to see.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Iran’s charm offensive
This week, capitalising on Monday’s prisoner swap with America, the Iranian president will continue his diplomatic onslaught in New York. Ebrahim Raisi is scheduled to address the UN General Assembly, meet the Gulf Co-operation Council—a bloc of Arab states previously adversarial towards Iran—and speak at the Council of Foreign Relations, a think-tank.

Few foresee major breakthroughs, such as reviving the nuclear deal that America abandoned in 2018. But the regime hopes it can solve three pressing problems. First, the cash-strapped country is desperate for the billions in oil revenues frozen by American sanctions. Second, it is seeking international buy-in for the succession of its ageing supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, to ensure the survival of his Islamic Republic. Third, it wants no foreign interference in its efforts to quash its biggest threat—the disgruntled population at home. A year after Mahsa Amini, a young woman, was detained and killed for showing her hair, Iranians remain restive.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Canada points fingers over inflation
The inflation blame game in Canada is likely to intensify this week, after the latest figures are released on Tuesday. The country’s annual rate had fallen steadily from over 8% in mid-2022, to 2.8% this June. But in July it jumped to 3.3%, and another rise is expected for August. The failure to push inflation below 2%, the central bank’s target, has dragged down the popularity of the Liberal government and Justin Trudeau, the prime minister.

As in many countries, Canada’s biggest problem is food prices, which are climbing faster than those of other goods (by 7.7% in July, for example). The government recently summoned the heads of Canada’s largest grocery retailers to Ottawa to demand that they stabilise prices by October 9th. It threatened them with extra tax if they failed. The grocers, meanwhile, insist inflation is a political hot potato that should not be left in their basket.



PHOTO: AP
Hunting Hunter Biden, and his father
Last week Kevin McCarthy, the Republican leader of America’s House of Representatives, announced that he was opening an impeachment inquiry into Joe Biden. Now Washington is waiting to see what that means in practice (Mr McCarthy was light on the details).

Meanwhile, the House Oversight Committee’s tortured investigation into Robert “Hunter” Biden, the president’s son, drags on. On Tuesday Alejandro Mayorkas, the Secretary of Homeland Security, is due to respond to a subpoena from the HOC requesting all “documents and communications” regarding the investigation, among other demands.

Plenty of uncomfortable details have been uncovered about the first son—including shirking taxes and lying about his drug use while buying a gun—but little that implicates his father. And Mr McCarthy’s impeachment investigation will almost certainly fail to take down the older Mr Biden. To charge the president, and progress to a trial in the Senate, Mr McCarthy must first win a House vote, and his majority is wafer thin.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The peculiar world of golden passports
New citizenship comes at a price. Over a dozen countries set their own value for passports, making them available in return for a combination of donations, investments, deposits and real-estate purchases. In “The Golden Passport: Global Mobility for Millionaires”—a meticulously researched book released on Tuesday—Kristin Surak dives into the business of selling citizenship.

Ms Surak, a politics sociologist at the London School of Economics, sheds light on how the multibillion-dollar industry has grown and turned professional. Citizenship-by-investment (CBI) programmes have formalised the rules; background checks are, at least in theory, rigorous.

Still, people with chequered pasts do sometimes slip through the cracks. And some schemes cause contention: the EU is taking Malta to court over its programme. Meanwhile microstates, such as Saint Kitts and Nevis, no longer dominate the market. Less than a decade after it started selling golden passports, Turkey now accounts for around half of global CBI naturalisations.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which cult 1960s TV series featured a protagonist known only as number 6?

Monday: What is the name for the cavity in a shotgun into which the cartridge is inserted?

There comes a point when a dream becomes reality and reality becomes a dream.

Frances Farmer
