The world in brief
September 8, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Russia said that America’s plan to supply Ukraine with depleted uranium shells was a “criminal act”. The Biden administration said on Wednesday that it would provide the munitions, used in M1 Abrams tanks, as part of a package of military and humanitarian aid worth $1bn. Meanwhile Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary-general, said that Ukrainian forces were “gradually gaining ground” in their counter-offensive; Ukraine claimed this week to have pierced Russia’s first line of defence on the southern front.

China’s currency, the yuan, tumbled to 7.3 against the dollar, its lowest in 16 years, as the country’s economy struggles to recover from a post-covid slump. Data released on Thursday showed that China’s exports had declined by 8.8% year on year in August—although that was an improvement from the 14.5% decrease in July.

Shares in Apple fell by more than 3% on Thursday, amid reports that China had banned the use of iPhones by state employees. China, one of the American tech giant’s largest foreign markets, already does not allow some government workers to use iPhones, but the new restrictions are reportedly more widespread. Apple’s market value has dropped by more than $200bn in the past two days.

Peter Navarro, a trade adviser to President Donald Trump, was convicted of two counts of criminal contempt of Congress for failing to comply with a subpoena issued by the committee investigating the Capitol riot. He is the second Trump-era official to be convicted for that offence: last year Steve Bannon was sentenced to four months in prison (he has appealed against his verdict).

The Biden administration condemned as “hateful [and] antisemitic” comments made by Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president, in a speech he gave in August. A video of Mr Abbas emerged on Wednesday, in which he claimed that Hitler killed Europe’s Jews for their “social role”—what he said were their predatory lending habits—and not their religion. The EU's diplomatic service also slammed the remarks as “false and grossly misleading”.

German industrial output fell by 0.8% in July, the third consecutive monthly decline. Weak demand for goods in China, labour shortages and higher interest rates have all contributed to sluggish factory growth, further weighing on Germany’s struggling economy. Data published on Wednesday showed that industrial orders fell by 11.7% in July compared with the previous month.

Spain’s top female football players announced a strike over pay, a day before the Liga F season was due to begin. They initially demanded a minimum salary of €‎25,000 ($27,000), up from €‎16,000, which the league refused. Male players currently earn at least €‎180,000, according to the Spanish Players’ Association. The dispute comes as a sexism scandal has overshadowed Spanish football.

Figure of the day: 291, the number of homes in east London blocked from being built by Britain’s High Court in 2021, in part to save a mulberry tree. Read the full story.


PHOTO: EPA
Three reasons food prices are rising—again
On Friday the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organisation releases its food-price index for August. Global food prices have fallen in recent months on a year-on-year basis. But the FAO gauge signalled a small rise in July compared with June, and the news for August may be worse.

Russia is bombing Ukrainian ports after withdrawing from a deal that allowed Ukraine’s grain to flow through the Black Sea. India has banned exports of non-basmati white rice after devastating rainfall. And El Niño, a weather event known for disrupting crop cycles, threatens to bake much of Asia and Central America.

This has put food markets on edge. Global rice prices, which neared a 12-year high after India’s ban, remain elevated. Vegetable-oil prices are sizzling hot, too. Such news will be hard to take for poorer countries. Resurgent inflation may prompt their central banks to keep interest rates high for longer, starving their economies of credit.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Florida’s 15-week abortion ban challenged in court
On Friday Florida’s Supreme Court will consider a challenge, brought by abortion providers, to the state’s ban on abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy. They argue that the right to privacy, which voters added to the state constitution in 1980, protects the procedure. Abortion-rights advocates had agitated for that guarantee as an insurance policy should the country-wide abortion right, established by Roe v. Wade in 1973, ever be overturned—as it was last year.

But the 15-week ban will probably hold: all seven justices were appointed by Republicans; five were named by the current governor and presidential candidate, Ron DeSantis. If the court upholds the ban, 30 days later a stricter prohibition, on abortion after six weeks, will take effect. Mr DeSantis signed that law in April. It will affect women outside the state, too. Florida accounts for nearly 10% of abortions in America. Women from Alabama, Georgia and South Carolina, neighbours with more stringent laws, often go to Florida for abortions.


PHOTO: DPA
Germany’s controversial heating law
In 2004, shortly before becoming Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel said that “well-sealed windows” came to mind when she thought about her country. She had a point: German houses, for example, lose their heat three times more slowly than draughty British ones. Now, Germany is about to introduce a law that makes domestic heating greener, by banning new oil and gas boilers and subsidising heat pumps. Many Germans don’t like the idea. Their anger has helped the right-wing populist party, Alternative for Germany, surge in the polls.

The Bundestag looks set to pass the bill on Friday. The governing coalition reached a compromise in the summer, which included giving households more time to change their heating. But Germany’s highest court ruled that parliament needed more time to discuss it, which delayed the vote until after the recess. The saga shows the challenge of greening domestic heating: mandating new systems is sure to anger homeowners, but subsidising them generously is expensive.


PHOTO: ALAMY
America’s second-largest grocer feels the squeeze
In tough times, shoppers cut back to the essentials. Unfortunately for Kroger, America’s second-largest grocer by revenues, they also switch to rivals they consider cheaper, like Walmart, the reigning champion. That explains why analysts expect Kroger to report a decline in sales of 1.4%, year on year, when it releases second-quarter results on Friday.

Walmart, by contrast, notched up second-quarter growth of 5.4% in American sales, widening its lead. To narrow the gap, Kroger plans to merge with Albertsons, a smaller rival. On Wednesday reports emerged that the two planned to offload 400 stores in a bid to assuage regulators worried about the deal’s impact on consumers. Even after a tie-up, the two would capture less of Americans’ grocery spending than Walmart. What’s more, Amazon, the country’s largest e-retailer, also has its sights set on the market. That should ease regulators’ minds—but won’t make things easier for Kroger.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The All Blacks are no longer all-conquering
New Zealand’s rugby union team, known as the All Blacks, usually make opponents quake with their pre-match Maori war dance, the haka. But the side might seem less intimidating than usual when they play France in the opening game of the World Cup in Paris on Friday. The All Blacks have dominated the game for decades. But they suddenly look vulnerable. In a pre-tournament match against South Africa they collapsed to a 35-7 defeat.

Fans blame bad coaching. But declining participation among young Kiwis is also to blame, shrinking the number of emerging stars. And top-level professionals are tempted abroad by big money deals, making them ineligible for their national side. Finally, New Zealand’s opponents look stronger than ever: France, Ireland and South Africa are all formidable. New Zealand remain many people’s favourites, but the tournament promises to be the most competitive in a long time. For rugby fans—at least those outside New Zealand—that is worth cheering.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which actor played Hermione in the Harry Potter movies?

Thursday: Which drummer from the rock band Genesis went on to have a successful solo singing career?


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

David Livingstone, Winterthur, Switzerland
Niamh Quinn, Dublin, Ireland
Jaime Jean, Mexico City, Mexico

They all gave the correct answers of George W Bush, growth, expat and haggle. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

If art does not enlarge men’s sympathies, it does nothing morally.

George Eliot
