The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 14, 2023

Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary general, said that the new Russian offensive against Ukraine has already begun, and that Russia will send “more troops, more weapons” into the war. Mr Stoltenberg, who is meeting with defence ministers in Brussels on Tuesday, said that leaders would discuss the possibility of sending aircraft to Ukraine. Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, renewed pleas for jets last week.

A week after earthquakes in Turkey and Syria a UN spokesperson said that the rescue phase is drawing to a close and that the focus would now shift towards providing food and housing. Turkish officials said that they had issued at least 113 arrest warrants for architects, contractors and engineers connected with buildings that collapsed. The government has been widely blamed for not enforcing construction standards. The death toll has now passed 36,000.

Maia Sandu, Moldova’s president, accused Russia of making plans to take down her government using external saboteurs. In a briefing, Ms Sandu said that Russia intended to disrupt Moldova’s plans to join the European Union. Mr Zelensky told EU leaders last week that Ukraine had intercepted communications outlining an alleged scheme by the Russian Secret Service to destroy Moldova.

The European Commission said that the European Union would probably avoid recession this year, as wholesale gas prices fell below pre-war levels. The commission’s winter forecast was more optimistic than anticipated, with growth in the euro area predicted to hit 0.9% in 2023. The commision also forecast that inflation would ease in the coming months.

Wang Wenbin, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, claimed that American spy balloons have flown into Chinese airspace more than ten times in the past year. His comments came after America shot down yet another unidentified object on Sunday. It was the third such incident in North American airspace in as many days, and came after a Chinese spy balloon was downed on February 4th.

Tens of thousands of Israelis gathered to protest the introduction of legislation that would weaken the country’s independent judiciary. Israel’s parliament will begin voting on the controversial reform bills soon. On Sunday Israel’s president, whose role is largely ceremonial, asked Binyamin Netanyahu’s government to delay the votes, saying that the country was “on the brink of constitutional and social collapse”.

Mars Wrigley, a chocolate manufacturer, was fined $14,500 after two workers fell into a vat of melted chocolate last year. They had been hired to clean the tanks in a factory in Pennsylvania, but neither had received proper training on safety procedures. A hole had to be cut into the bottom of the contraption to rescue the fallen contractors.

Fact of the day: 8.4%, the proportion of office buildings in London that are unoccupied. Read the full story.

A new boss for Japan’s central bank

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Tuesday Japan’s government named the next governor of the Bank of Japan. Ueda Kazuo, a veteran economist who served a term on the BoJ’s policy board until 2005, will replace Kuroda Haruhiko, who oversaw a decade of monetary stimulus, in April.

The change comes at a difficult time for the central bank. Japan has struggled with low inflation, sometimes tipping into deflation, for decades. The current rate of 4% is the highest in 41 years. But there is little sign of the sustained wage growth the BoJ would like to see before it opts to abandon its stimulus.

Analysts see in Mr Ueda a sign of continuity. Yet ultimately he will face tough decisions about the future of the BoJ’s policy of “yield-curve control”, a cap on ten-year government-bond yields; he may even have to oversee rate raises. This will require deft communication, impeccable timing and lots of luck.


Ukraine Defence Contact Group meets

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Tuesday the Ukraine Defence Contact Group meets in Brussels, bringing together defence ministers and chiefs from some 50 countries that support Ukraine with Oleksii Reznikov, their Ukrainian counterpart. On the agenda will be the supply of more heavy weapons, which Ukraine needs to face down a renewed Russian offensive and to retake occupied territory.

Since the group last met in January, America and Germany have promised to supply tanks (Britain earlier pledged to do so). Germany has also given permission for other countries to send their German-made Leopards. Ukraine, meanwhile, is now pressing for fighter jets. America has so far ruled out supplying F-16s. Sweden, which makes the Saab Gripen jets, has not yet been forthcoming, either. Following the larger group session, Sweden and Finland will attend a meeting of NATO defence ministers, though the countries’ applications to join the alliance have for months been held up by Turkey’s objections.

A reality check for American inflation

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Amid growing optimism that inflation is receding in America, figures on Tuesday will provide a reality check. Analysts forecast that consumer prices rose by about 0.5% in January compared with December, breaking a string of steadily decreasing readings. If that happens it will provide more evidence that America’s economy is stronger than many had expected—but that it remains saddled with more persistent inflationary pressure.

Prices for some goods, such as cars and furniture, have started to decline, thanks partly to the post-covid recovery in supply chains. But prices for services, from schooling to dry cleaning, are rising, fuelled by a tight labour market. Officials at the Federal Reserve say they will need to raise interest rates at least twice more to truly tame inflation. This tightening may eventually tip the American economy into a recession. But for now its resilience is remarkable.

Alcohol bans in Aboriginal communities

PHOTO: REUTERS
Alcoholism has blighted many Aboriginal communities in Australia. But last summer saw the expiry of old bans on the possession and consumption of booze in some parts of the Northern Territory, originally imposed to curtail Aboriginals’ drinking. In some places alcohol was able to flow freely for the first time in 15 years.

Natasha Fyles, the chief minister of the territory, had pronounced an end to what she called “a race-based policy”. Anthony Albanese, who took office as prime minister last May, had promised better representation for Australia’s indigenous people. But the wet season did not last long. Once alcohol sales resumed, crime and violence surged. At a parliamentary session beginning on Tuesday Ms Fyles’s government will legislate to reinstate the ban on alcohol sales.

This time communities can opt out of prohibition, although state officials must approve. Yet many Aboriginals are among the greatest supporters of restrictions⁠ on sales of booze—on the grounds that their communities are the biggest victims of the consequences of alcohol abuse.

The endurance of “A Doll’s House”

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
“A Doll’s House”, by Henrik Ibsen, had its debut in Denmark in 1879. But the play still has something to say about the ordinary corrosiveness of marriage. The plot sounds like a cliché: a seemingly meek housewife grows disillusioned with her husband’s condescending and controlling ways. Yet it patiently and convincingly builds up to its climax in a way that continues to feel fresh. Is there a moment in theatre more renowned than Nora slamming that door?

Given its timeless themes, “A Doll’s House” is usually on some stage somewhere. This week a new Broadway adaptation starts at the Hudson Theatre in New York. Directed by Jamie Lloyd and starring Jessica Chastain, who won a best actress Oscar in 2022, the production, which is being billed as “radical”, has a script by Amy Herzog, an off-Broadway darling known for her insightful plays. The question is whether this “thrilling reinvention” sharpens the contemporary resonances of Ibsen’s classic—or dulls them by making the parallels too obvious.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. Please note, the way we choose winners has changed. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Who was the longest-serving president of Kenya, in office from 1978 to 2002?

Monday: Which NFL team played its home matches at Shea Stadium in Queens, New York, before moving to East Rutherford, New Jersey?

It is easier to build strong children than to repair broken men.

Frederick Douglass
