The world in brief
June 26, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, said on Sunday that the aborted Wagner uprising constituted a “direct challenge” to Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president. On Saturday troops belonging to Wagner, a mercenary group, advanced on Moscow before suddenly stopping. In exchange the Kremlin said it would allow Yevgeny Prigozhin, Wagner’s leader, to leave Russia for Belarus without facing criminal charges. Mr Blinken said that the threat to Mr Putin’s authority “shows real cracks” in his regime, and predicted that the turmoil could create an “additional advantage” for Ukraine during the country’s counter-offensive against Russian forces.

Kyriakos Mitsotakis, leader of Greece’s conservative New Democracy party, claimed victory in the country’s general election on Sunday. With most of the votes counted, the party easily beat its nearest rival, the radical left-wing Syriza, by more than 20 points. It is the second time since May that Greeks have been called upon to vote.

Meanwhile, in Germany, the populist far-right AfD party won a district-council election for the first time. Its candidate, Robert Sesselmann, was elected in a run-off vote in Sonneberg, a small district in the eastern state of Thuringia. The seat carries little political weight, but it represents worrying support for an extremist outfit shunned by all other political parties.

Israel’s government put forward legislation to undo an important doctrine used by the country’s courts. The bill seeks to remove judges’ right to dismiss decisions for being “unreasonable”—which they have previously used to stop governments bringing in certain ministers and regulations. Attempts by Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, to reduce judicial power have led to widespread unrest in recent months.

Turkey’s central bank will ease rules forcing depositors to save in the country’s currency. The announcement is the latest sign that Turkey is moving towards saner economic policies. Previously Turkish banks had to hold 10% of the value of their foreign currency deposits in lira. This week, Turkey increased its benchmark interest rate by 6.5 percentage points, its first rise in two years.

There was fierce fighting on the streets of Khartoum, Sudan’s capital, on Sunday. The conflict in the country, which broke out in April, shows little sign of abating. Airstrikes and artillery fire were reported around the city, as government troops battled the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary group commanded by Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo. An estimated 1.5m people have now fled the war.

The Indian government ordered the leader of Manipur, a north-eastern state, to “work harder” to end violence between different ethnic groups. Since the start of May around 80 people have died—with more than 40,000 forced from their homes—in clashes between hill tribes and the larger lowland community. Manipur is governed by the political party of Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister.

Figure of the day: One-third, the share of American women of reproductive age that would have to drive more than an hour to get an abortion. Read the full story.


PHOTO: IDEAFORGE
India’s largest dronemaker goes public
India’s foreign policy is underpinned by a deep, post-colonial fear of being beholden to a richer power. That is why the country—which is the world’s largest importer of weapons—is desperate to expand its own defence industry. A “Make in India” policy was launched eight years ago, followed in 2020 by another initiative called “Atmanirbhar Bharat” (“Self-reliant India”).

One beneficiary has been ideaForge, a domestic dronemaker. Formed in 2007, the firm now accounts for half of India’s growing drones market. Much of that is down to orders for surveillance drones from the country’s army, which account for 75% of revenues. On Monday the company goes public, hoping to raise 2.4bn rupees ($29m) to fuel more growth. But it will face fierce competition. More local startups are entering the fray; there are much larger challengers abroad. Last week India announced that it will acquire 31 American MQ-9B drones, a far more sophisticated version of ideaForge’s product.


PHOTO: REUTERS
The ECB ponders uncomfortable truths
What Jackson Hole is to America’s Federal Reserve, Sintra is to the European Central Bank. Each year it gathers at the hideout, near Lisbon in Portugal, to ponder the latest data, research and policy. The IMF’s deputy director, Gita Gopinath, is expected to present three uncomfortable truths for monetary policy at the ECB Forum’s opening dinner on Monday.

One can guess at what those three truths might be. First: supply shocks can take a long time to subside, during which they drive up inflation across many sectors (core inflation in the eurozone remains stubborn at more than 5%). Second: the world is running out of workers, which may keep inflation elevated, especially in ageing Europe. Third: if fiscal policy is pushing the other way, to stimulate demand and boost investment, monetary policy must do an awful lot of work. In the coming days in Sintra, policymakers will discuss what they can do to bring down inflation, despite such harsh realities.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
DeSantis unveils his border agenda
For Ron DeSantis, a Republican candidate for the 2024 presidential election, immigration policy is campaign gold. It lets him brag about himself—as Florida’s governor he has flown migrants from Texas and New Mexico to Massachusetts and California, to the delight of many conservatives—while attacking his enemies. Mr DeSantis is fond of slamming President Joe Biden’s “open border policies”, such as ending Title 42 (a measure that allowed migrants to be quickly repelled). And it also allows him to take digs at Donald Trump, his main Republican rival.

On Monday Mr DeSantis will present his border-enforcement policies in Eagle Pass, Texas, which has a large migrant-processing centre. He will promise, if elected, to declare a national emergency; reinstate a policy forcing people to sit out immigration proceedings from Mexico; and complete the border wall that Mr Trump failed to finish. The former president recently vowed to overhaul America in his first six months, should he win again. “Why didn’t he do it in his first four years?” replied Mr DeSantis.


PHOTO: REUTERS
The UN’s uncompromising stance on drugs
On Monday the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime launched its annual World Drug Report. It once again complained about rising illegal drug supplies, trafficking and use. The UNODC reckons that 13.2m people around the world injected drugs in 2021, 18% higher than in 2020, and that over 296m people used drugs in 2021, a 23% increase from the previous decade.

The UNODC remains wedded to the idea that all illicit drug use should be criminalised. Last year it noted that “drug use for non-medical purposes is harmful”; this year it calls for better monitoring of the public-health impacts of the global drugs trade, and for more to be done to tackle trafficking rings, especially those supplying powerful synthetic highs. While rises in the supply of such substances are concerning, the UNODC’s blanket attitude seems increasingly outdated. Many countries, including America and several in the EU, are liberalising their approach to “soft” drugs like cannabis.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The first post-pandemic hajj
This week marks the start of the hajj, the annual pilgrimage performed by Muslims to Mecca in Saudi Arabia. It is the first year since the pandemic began without any limit on who can make the journey. Some 2m pilgrims are expected in 2023, which is not quite a return to the 2.5m seen in 2019, the last restriction-free year.

The hajj is one of the five pillars of Islam, and all Muslims who are physically and financially able are expected to complete it once in their lifetime. It is also a huge boon for Saudi Arabia: religious tourism—which includes hajj and umrah, a non-compulsory pilgrimage—currently generates about 7% of the country’s GDP. And the kingdom is determined to boost that as it diversifies its economy away from fossil fuels. The government says that it intends to host 6m pilgrims per hajj by 2030 (30m religious tourists overall) despite the event becoming increasingly dangerous due to climate change.



Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which 1951 Hitchcock film was based on a Patricia Highsmith novel?

All things are possible until they are proved impossible—and even the impossible may only be so, as of now.

Pearl S. Buck
