The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (22:11 GMT+1 / 05:11 Hong Kong)

Ukraine’s armed forces have advanced to within 50km of the border with Russia, according to General Valery Zaluzhny, their commander-in-chief. The country’s troops have retaken more than 3,000 square kilometres of territory in 11 days, recapturing over 20 towns and villages on Sunday alone. Bodies of civilians that bore signs of torture were found in the north-eastern region of Kharkiv, according to the office of Ukraine’s prosecutor general.

Russia launched dozens of attacks on the Kharkiv region on Monday, suggesting an intensification of its response. Russian forces also retaliated by attacking civilian infrastructure including power stations and water facilities. Power and water in Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second city, were cut off on Sunday before being restored and then hit again on Monday. Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said that attacks against utilities are meant “to deprive people of light and heat”.

Goldman Sachs is preparing to sack hundreds of employees as soon as next week, according to multiple news reports. During the pandemic, as deal-making boomed, Goldman paused its annual performance reviews and struggled to retain workers amid burnout. Deals have since dried up, and cost-cutting is back. In the second quarter of 2022, the bank’s earnings were down by 47% year over year.

Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor, said there was no reason to expect an imminent revival of the Iran nuclear deal. Iran, he said, had refused to agree to Western countries’ conditions to resuscitate the pact. “It certainly won’t happen soon, although it looked for a while like it would,” he noted at a meeting with Israel’s prime minister, who called the agreement a “critical mistake”.

President Joe Biden signed an executive order to supercharge America’s biotechnology industry by growing the country’s biomanufacturing capacity, expanding the market for biobased products and boosting R&D. An administration official said that the package was motivated by similar investments in other countries, especially China.

An empty capsule designed to carry tourists into space aboard the “New Shepard” rocket of Blue Origin, the aspiring rocket firm of Jeff Bezos, disconnected itself during launch and descended safely back to earth using a parachute. The unplanned “anomaly” will be investigated by America’s Federal Aviation Administration before flights are allowed to resume.

Charles III delivered his first address to Britain’s parliament as king, promising to emulate his late mother’s “selfless duty”. The coffin bearing Queen Elizabeth II was taken to Edinburgh; on Tuesday it will be flown to London, to lie in state at Westminster Hall for four days. The funeral will take place on September 19th.

Fact of the day: 108,000, the number of barrels of oil stolen each day by thieves in Nigeria. Read the full story.

A sigh of relief in America

PHOTO: EPA
The White House used to dread monthly inflation reports. Each was worse than the previous one; each delivered a blow to President Joe Biden’s popularity. But that has started to change. In July consumer prices remained the same as in June—the first absence of month-on-month inflation since early 2020. Figures for August, released on Tuesday, are expected to maintain that cheerful streak.

Receding inflation has boosted Mr Biden’s approval ratings ahead of November’s midterm elections. Even Republicans are toning down their criticism of his record. But economists will be harsher. The main reason for America’s subdued inflation is a steep fall in oil prices. Strip out volatile energy and food costs, and core inflation is expected to have risen by about 0.4% last month. That is not low enough to prove that inflation is fading. Analysts and investors think the Federal Reserve will stay hawkish for now.


The mood in Moscow has shifted

PHOTO: REUTERS
In recent days Russian forces have suffered their most serious reverse in Ukraine since they gave up their quest for Kyiv in March. Ukraine’s liberation of at least 3,000 square kilometres has scuppered Russia’s hopes of controlling the whole of Donbas, a contested region in the country’s east, as well as other parts of Ukraine.

As Ukrainians and their allies rejoice, faces on Russian television are crestfallen. Generals and state media offer a euphemism: that troops are “regrouping”. The foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has spoken of negotiations. But Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, has been silent on the extraordinary developments. On Saturday, as his troops retreated in Ukraine, he was opening a ferris wheel in a Moscow park.

Mr Putin is under pressure at home as well as on the battlefield. Pro-war Russian military bloggers are livid. Nationalists are calling for strategic changes, including general conscription. But sending more reluctant, poorly trained soldiers to face powerful American weapons would hardly be popular. Meanwhile, despite the surprising resilience of the Russian economy, the West’s sanctions are hurting the country’s elite. Mr Putin is far from losing the war, but his battles are becoming fiercer.

Singapore opens up to travellers

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
During the pandemic Singapore’s national carrier, Singapore Airlines, was so short of business that it sold locals dining spots on board a grounded double-decker A380 plane. Between 2019 and 2021 passenger numbers at Changi airport, the main air hub, plunged by 96%. But since the government began loosening border restrictions late last year, tourists have started returning. This summer traffic at Changi reached 50% of pre-pandemic levels. To handle the increased traffic, on Tuesday the airport reopens Terminal 4, which closed in May 2020.

Singapore’s reopening contrasts with ongoing travel restrictions in its Asian city rival, Hong Kong, where passenger numbers stand at about 5% pre-pandemic levels. Hong Kong, a former business and travel hub, still obliges in-bound travellers to quarantine in a hotel for three nights. But opposition to the restrictions is growing among Hong Kong’s business community, and the authorities are starting to take note. Quarantine rules for local air crews were eased at the weekend.

Kenya’s controversial new president

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
William Ruto, who will be sworn in as Kenya’s new president on Tuesday, has an alarming history. His political life began in the thuggish youth wing of the ruling party under Daniel arap Moi, the late dictator. After a disputed election in 2007 the International Criminal Court accused Mr Ruto of orchestrating ethnic violence; he denied wrongdoing and the case later collapsed. Corruption allegations, which Mr Ruto insists are concocted, have dogged his career.

Mr Ruto campaigned for the presidency with a populist, anti-establishment message. But he vows to rule democratically. Significantly, he has promised to bolster the independence of the criminal-justice system from the government by granting parliament the power to approve independent budgets for the judiciary and police. If Mr Ruto delivers on this point, liberal critics may be assuaged, at least for a while. Yet tougher challenges lie ahead. Mr Ruto won the election promising to champion the interests of the poor. But high inflation, and Kenya’s debt-distressed economy, will not easily be tamed.

A Uyghur voice from behind bars

PHOTO: LIVINGOTHERWISE.COM
A nameless Uyghur man walks around Urumqi, the capital of Xinjiang, in search of a place to stay. At every turn he is met with vitriol and condescension. “The Backstreets”, a Uyghur novel published in English on Tuesday, is a biting portrait of what it is like to become a second-class citizen in your own homeland. Its story reflects the life of the man who wrote it.

Perhat Tursun, a novelist and poet known for challenging Uyghur social norms, finished “The Backstreets” in 2006. His writing later earned him a 16-year-prison sentence as he became one of the countless Uyghur intellectuals detained by the Chinese state. Darren Byler, an American anthropologist and one of the book’s two translators, discovered the text on an internet forum. Working with a Uyghur man credited only as Anonymous, Mr Byler finished his translation in 2015. Since then the anonymous translator has also been detained. “The Backstreets” has been critically acclaimed. But neither its author nor its Uyghur translator will hear that praise.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which rock duo originally released the single “Seven Nation Army”?

Monday: Which series of novels, written by Stephenie Meyer, focused on the tribulations of Bella Swan, a teenager who falls in love with a vampire?

Having power is not nearly as important as what you choose to do with it.

Roald Dahl
