The world in brief
April 13, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The rate of inflation in America slowed to 5% year-on-year in March from 6% a month earlier. Inflation is at its lowest level in almost two years due to cooling energy prices, which fell by 3.5% last month. However, core inflation, which excludes volatile food and fuel costs, rose by 0.4% month-on-month in March to an annualised rate of nearly 5% thanks to upward price pressures in the housing market. The Federal Reserve, America’s central bank, is expected to raise interest rates by a quarter point when it meets in May.

The Biden administration proposed stricter limits on pollution from cars to boost electric vehicle sales in America. The regulations would require about 67% of new vehicles sold in the country to be electric by 2032. The figure is currently close to 6%. The Environmental Protection Agency forecasts that the new caps will cause America to avoid nearly 10bn tonnes of carbon emissions through to 2055.

A council in Memphis, Tennessee voted to reinstate the second of two black Democratic lawmakers expelled last week from the state’s legislature for participating in a gun-control protest. The other was restored to his role on Monday, though both will have to win special elections in the coming months to keep their seats. The vote to banish them by the Republican-controlled legislature was widely condemned.

Syria’s foreign minister visited Saudi Arabia for the first time in over a decade. The trip comes ahead of a meeting there on Friday of the Arab League’s foreign ministers. They are expected to discuss inviting Syria back into the group, from which it was suspended in 2011 following President Bashar al-Assad’s bloody crackdown on pro-democracy protests. But in February Saudi Arabia signalled that it was considering a rapprochement with Syria.

Joe Biden urged Northern Irish leaders to restore power-sharing in a speech at Ulster University. Stormont, the region’s parliament, has not sat since the main unionist party walked out last year in protest over post-Brexit trading arrangements. Mr Biden visited Northern Ireland to mark the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement, a deal that largely ended sectarian violence in the region.

NPR announced it would stop posting on Twitter after the social-media platform labelled it “state-affiliated media”, the term it uses to describe propaganda outfits for autocratic regimes. NPR is the first large media outlet to quit the platform in protest over the new label. Earlier, Elon Musk described owning Twitter as “quite painful” but said the company was only months away from making a profit.

The UN said that 441 migrants died crossing the Mediterranean to reach Europe in the first three months of 2023, making it the deadliest first quarter since 2017. António Vitorino, the head of the UN’s migration agency, blamed countries delaying rescue operations. On Tuesday Italy declared a six-month state of emergency on immigration, allowing its government to more quickly deport migrants.

Fact of the day: 35%, the proportion of GDP that Britain’s government will take in tax from 2025, according to the OBR, a fiscal watchdog. Read the full story.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
G20 finance ministers meet
On Thursday finance ministers and central bankers from the G20 will meet for their final day of talks in Washington, DC. The gathering, held on the sidelines of the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, is the second of India’s year-long G20 presidency. The country’s officials have an ambitious agenda, with plans to discuss everything from international tax co-ordination to whether the World Bank should be able to raise additional capital to help poor countries. Other topics may include climate financing and cross-border regulation of cryptocurrencies.

But progress will probably be modest. February’s meeting in Bengaluru, in southern India, ended in division over Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Anton Siluanov, Moscow’s finance minister, was a no-show. Janet Yellen, America’s treasury secretary, insisted on condemning the invasion in writing, an idea resisted by neutral countries like India. Countries failed to agree on a final, joint statement, with the hosts simply issuing a meeting summary. The disagreements may be just as fierce this time around.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Indian IT adopts a brace position
Indian banks have stayed relatively unscathed amid the turmoil that has engulfed some of their counterparts in America and Europe. But analysts fear another part of the country’s economy, its IT sector, could be hit hard. Clients in financial services account for nearly 40% of Indian IT companies’ total revenues, according to NASSCOM, a trade body. Around half of them come from North America. If they sneeze, Indian tech catches a cold.

Still, while pandemic-related peaks in demand have abated, the sector’s big hitters look relatively stable, at least for now. Annual revenue growth at TCS, the market leader, did slow in the first three months of 2023 compared with the previous quarter, but only from 19% to 17%. Figures for Infosys, TCS’s big rival, which reports on Thursday, are expected to show growth, too. There may even be a silver lining to the financial turmoil. As firms tighten their belts, they may be tempted to turn to TCS and Infosys for cost-cutting consultancy services.



PHOTO: EYEVINE
America’s abortion-pill fight
America’s Department of Justice asked an appeals court to say by noon on Thursday if it will block a lower-court ruling that bans the sale of mifepristone, a pill used for abortions. The ruling on April 7th by Matthew Kacsmaryk, a federal judge in Texas, is the first by a court to interfere with the Food and Drug Administration’s approval of a drug.

The DoJ is arguing before the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals—one of America’s most conservative courts—that Mr Kacsmaryk’s ruling would “thwart” the FDA’s “scientific judgment” and “severely harm women”. The government is also awaiting word from Thomas Rice, a federal judge in Washington state who issued a ruling that contradicts Mr Kacsmaryk’s, on how the two decisions will interact (though he may not have the final word). If the Fifth Circuit court upholds the Texan decision, a quick appeal to the Supreme Court looms. Otherwise, Mr Kacsmaryk’s ruling could soon take mifepristone off the market.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Dominion v Fox News
The most sensational story about American journalism in years has been barely mentioned on the country’s most-watched cable-news network. That is because it puts that network, Fox News, in a bad light. Dominion Voting Systems, a voting-technology firm, is suing Fox for defamation. It claims that the network knowingly promoted conspiracy theories about Dominion after the 2020 presidential election, namely that Dominion had thrown the election for Joe Biden. Fox denies the allegations, arguing that it was merely reporting newsworthy statements made by Donald Trump and his supporters.

Jury selection in the trial starts on Thursday. Emails and texts, released ahead of the trial, reveal that Fox executives feared losing Trump-aligned viewers by undermining him. “The audience is furious”, wrote Suzanne Scott, the network’s boss, after a journalist corrected a guest. She worried it would be “bad for business”. Yet so would the potentially hefty fine that Fox could incur if it loses the case. Dominion wants $1.6bn.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Searching for life on Jupiter
“Follow the water” is one of the main tenets of astrobiology, the study of life in the universe. Water is vital to life on Earth; it is reasonable to assume that might be the case elsewhere too. Most efforts have focused on Mars, which may once have had oceans. On Thursday, though, the European Space Agency will launch an attempt to follow the water farther afield: the so-called “icy moons” of Jupiter.

As with Saturn, Neptune and Uranus—the solar system’s other gas-giant planets—many of Jupiter’s moons are known (or suspected) to have liquid oceans underneath their icy shells. The ESA’s Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer (nicknamed “JUICE”) will investigate some of those moons, particularly Ganymede, using photography, radar and magnetic readings.

But do not expect results any time soon. After blasting off from French Guinea, the spaceship will take eight years to reach its destination. And even if it is found, water is not enough. After all, life on Earth requires a lot more than simply hydrogen and oxygen.


Daily Quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Thursday: Who composed the opera “Porgy and Bess”?

Wednesday: What style of poetry, which often expresses personal feelings, encompasses elegies, odes and sonnets?

The truth isn't always beauty, but the hunger for it is.

Nadine Gordimer
