The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (00:11 GMT+1 / 07:11 Hong Kong)

Ukrainian officials said gas leaks from Nord Stream 1 and 2, pipelines connecting Russia and Germany, were caused by a Russian “terrorist attack”. Underwater blasts were recorded before the leaks began. Both pipes were filled with gas but inactive, in part because Russia has been withholding gas from Europe in response to economic sanctions. Denmark and Germany are investigating the cause of the leaks. Poland’s prime minister said he suspected sabotage.

Hurricane Ian hit Cuba, cutting power for nearly 1m people and forcing 50,000 to evacuate. Ian is expected to intensify before reaching Florida on Wednesday. Many Floridians have already had to evacuate. Forecasters predict that this year’s Atlantic hurricane season, which runs until November 30th, will be unusually stormy—in part because of interactions between the Pacific Ocean and the atmosphere above it.

The IMF urged Britain’s government to “re-evaluate” its new fiscal policy, which triggered a collapse in the value of sterling after it was announced last week. The global lender reckons the “untargeted” measures, which include £45bn of debt-funded tax cuts, will worsen inflation and increase inequality. Earlier, the Bank of England’s chief economist said the package would require a “significant monetary response”.

Officials in Kazakhstan said around 98,000 Russians had crossed their shared border since president Vladimir Putin announced a partial mobilisation. Last week Mr Putin said around 300,000 men were needed on the frontline of his war in Ukraine; some 250,000 have since left Russia. Meanwhile Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, urged world leaders to take “preventive” action, rather than waiting to “react” to Russia’s latest escalation.

The S&P 500 closed at its lowest level of the year for a second straight day. The pound rebounded against the dollar, rising above the nadir of below $1.04 that it had reached on Monday. Markets remain on edge amid mounting economic anxiety and the prospect of steeper interest-rate rises.

Saudi Arabia’s king appointed his son, Crown Prince Muhammad bin Salman, as prime minister, a role traditionally held by the monarch. The move formalises the crown prince as head of the government, though he has been the kingdom’s de facto ruler since 2017. King Salman, who is 86, has recently spent time in hospital and cut back on duties.

The World Bank slashed its growth forecast for China in 2022, in part because of the country’s zero-covid policy and property crisis. The bank expects the world’s second-biggest economy to grow at an annual rate of 2.8%, a little over half of its previous forecast of 5%. Growth in the East Asia and the Pacific regions was also revised down to 3.2%.

Fact of the day: 25,000, the number of Near Earth Objects, or space rocks that are 140 metres across or bigger, thought to exist. If Earth were hit by some, the damage could be immense. Read the full story.

Years of anger erupt in Iran

PHOTO: PRESS ASSOCIATION
Over 11 nights now, throughout the country, Iranians have taken to the streets, braving violence and arrest to protest against their government. The spark was the death in custody earlier this month of a young woman detained by morality police over her supposedly immodest clothes. But the protests have snowballed into an outpouring of anger against the regime. Chants of “freedom” and “death to the dictator” are not merely cries for tweaking headscarf laws. Many Iranians want more radical change.

The regime, of course, has fought back. It has killed dozens of protesters, arrested countless more and branded them all as foreign agents. A familiar playbook, this—and probably enough to see it through yet another wave of unrest. But the theocracy’s rotten foundations look wobblier than ever. Iran’s economy is a mess (inflation is above 50%), the bureaucracy is unresponsive, and many Iranians are tired of their long isolation from the world. More unrest is inevitable.

Sham votes in Russia-occupied Ukraine

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Over the past week Ukrainians living in four Russian-occupied regions have “voted” on whether to join Russia. On Tuesday the Kremlin-backed puppet governments in those provinces—Kherson, Zaporizhia, Donetsk and Luhansk—claimed interim “results” in the sham referendums, of between 87% and 99% in favour of being annexed by the invading country. Such ludicrous numbers should fool no one.

The question is what comes next. It is widely assumed that Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, will order the annexation of the four Ukrainian territories on Saturday in a speech before parliament. Many wonder whether he will draft men from those provinces to fight for Russia—on the spurious grounds that once these parts of Ukraine are absorbed, their residents will be Russian and liable for conscription. A ban on military-age men leaving the occupied territories was unexpectedly lifted in recent days. But many were warned that the order would be reversed again on Saturday.

The ECB’s geopolitical role

PHOTO: REUTERS
Central banks have their hands full fighting inflation while trying to preserve their economies from stagnating. The European Central Bank, in particular, has to grapple with a largely energy-driven price shock, the response to which is proving hard to get right. One way of preventing such big problems from running out of control in the future may be to encourage “geoeconomic co-operation” between Europe and America. That is the subject of a talk that Christine Lagarde, the head of the ECB, will give to the Atlantic Council, an American think-tank, on Wednesday.

The main reason central banks are in such trouble is because global disruptions—a pandemic, war, broken supply chains—are messing with economies. Ms Lagarde will probably argue that America and Europe have a collective interest in strengthening co-operation to stabilise their economies, make supply chains more resilient and fight climate change. More interesting will be to see what Ms Lagarde thinks central banks can do to help.

Biden’s fight against hunger

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The White House hosts a conference on Wednesday to tackle hunger, nutrition and health in America. Such food-related issues plague millions of Americans, especially the poor, rural communities and minorities. Growing obesity increases the risk of serious health problems. In 2020 about one in five American children was obese, nearly four times the share in 1970. The ratio is higher for black, Hispanic and poor children. Food-related disease is also costly. According to a study published by the American Diabetes Association, in 2017 diabetes cost America $327bn in direct medical costs and lost productivity.

Mr Biden is expected to announce increased access to free school meals and incentives for the purchase of fruits and vegetables with food stamps, access to which will be expanded. He also wants to develop a more informative front-of-package labelling scheme like that in Europe. But with the midterms looming, Mr Biden may not have support in Congress for long enough to see these measures through.


“Blonde” has less Fun: Marilyn Monroe

PHOTO: MATT KENNEDY/NETFLIX
Andrew Dominik’s film about Marilyn Monroe, released on Netflix on Wednesday, avoids all of the obvious biopic set-pieces: Norma Jeane Mortenson choosing her stage name, bleaching her hair or singing “Happy Birthday” to President John F. Kennedy. Instead, it jumps from one traumatic episode to the next. Adapted from a novel by Joyce Carol Oates, “Blonde” shows Monroe being beaten by her unstable mother (played by Julianne Nicholson) and her jealous husband (Bobby Cannavale), suffering through an abortion and a miscarriage, being raped by a studio president (David Warshovsky), and being used as a sex toy by an American president, presumably Kennedy (Caspar Phillipson).

Ana de Armas is uncannily convincing in the lead role, but all “Blonde” has to say about Monroe, over the course of 166 relentless minutes, is that she was a passive victim, defined not by her talent or drive but by her abusive relationships. Monroe, and Ms de Armas, deserve better.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which American comedian replaced Johnny Carson as host of the Tonight Show in 1992?

Tuesday: What was the name of the American aid plan to Europe after the second world war?

He who knows all the answers has not been asked all the questions.

Confucius 
