The world in brief
August 1, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Niger’s military junta, which took power in a coup last week, arrested several senior politicians from the overthrown civilian government. Earlier, a spokesman for the army accused France of planning an operation to rescue the president, Mohamed Bazoum, who is being held by the army. France, the former colonial power in Niger, had deployed 1,500 soldiers in the country to help it fight jihadists. On Sunday, the Economic Community of West African States threatened the “use of force” against Niger’s military.

The euro-zone economy grew by 0.3% in the second quarter, marking a return to growth. Resilient growth in France and Spain contributed but Germany’s economy, the bloc’s largest, did not expand. Inflation remains a concern for the European Central Bank. Core prices, which exclude volatile food and energy, rose 5.5% year-on-year, unchanged from June.

An affiliate of Islamic State claimed responsibility for the suicide attack that killed at least 54 people on Sunday in north-west Pakistan. The bombing targeted a political rally held by Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam, an Islamist party with ties to the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Based in Afghanistan’s north-east, Islamic State Khorasan Province has staged numerous similar attacks against the Taliban.

In a speech laying out his economic policy, Ron DeSantis promised that, if elected America’s president, he would revoke China’s “favoured-nation” trade status. That would enable all sorts of tariffs to be levied against China and contravene the World Trade Organisation’s rules, which require members—including America and China—to give each other equal treatment. Mr DeSantis also vowed to “rein in” the Federal Reserve.

Riad Salameh stepped down as the chief of Lebanon’s central bank after 30 years in the role. Once vaunted for restoring economic stability following the country’s civil war, Mr Salameh subsequently oversaw a programme that funnelled bank deposits to the government, which was likened to a Ponzi scheme. He faces charges of corruption and money-laundering in Lebanon and in countries across Europe.

Anthony Albanese, Australia’s prime minister, said he might hold an early election if his government could not pass a A$10bn ($6.7bn) housing bill. In June opposition parties in the country’s upper house blocked the legislation, which would provide A$500m annually to build social housing; if they do so a second time Mr Albanese can dissolve parliament.

Myanmar’s generals extended the country’s state of emergency, which they declared after they seized power in 2021, for a further six months. The Tatmadaw, as the army is known, will now delay promised elections. Myanmar descended into civil war two years ago, after the army deposed the democratically elected government of Aung San Suu Kyi, who is currently in prison on trumped-up charges.

Figure of the day: 30%, the proportion of Britain’s foreign-aid budget that is spent domestically, mostly on housing asylum-seekers in hotels. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Australia mulls another rate rise
There are many reasons for Australia’s central bank to leave interest rates unchanged for the second consecutive month when it meets on Tuesday. Inflation is falling steadily: the annual rate dropped to 6% in June, down from a peak of 7.8% in December. The economy is also slowing—largely because consumer spending has plunged. Australians are beginning to feel the squeeze. Fixed-rate mortgages have shielded many from the effects of the bank’s previous interest-rate increases, but almost 900,000 home loans will expire this year, lumping mortgage-holders with higher repayments.

Such conditions would suggest the end of the Reserve Bank’s tightening cycle. But many economists are expecting one final hike. They predict interest rates will be raised to 4.35% (from 4.1%). Despite the recent cooling, inflation is still more than double the bank’s target range of 2-3%. As in America and Europe, whose central banks raised rates last week, Australia’s central bankers may not want to leave the job half done.


PHOTO: AP
Child labour in America
Visit an American swimming pool or ice-cream shop and you may well find a teenager at the lifeguard stand or till. Such summer jobs are a rite of passage and perfectly legal. From the age of 14 teens can do some jobs during certain hours. Others, involving, say, meat grinders or serving alcohol, are off-limits.

Yet employers sometimes flout the rules. In the past ten months the Labour Department found nearly 4,500 youngsters working illegally, up by 44% from the previous year. Some states are even loosening rules.

On Tuesday Arkansas will waive a requirement that under-16s verify their age with a state agency before getting hired. The state’s Republican governor, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, called the standard “burdensome and obsolete”. Lawmakers in Minnesota want to let 16-year-olds work on building sites. In February a firm that cleans meatpacking plants in both states was fined for illegally employing more than 100 kids. Some had suffered chemical burns.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Uber’s advantage over Lyft
Since the pandemic Uber, a California-based ridesharing app, has been on a bumpy road. When economies reopened, it faced a shortage of drivers as many had taken other work. But better pay, the cost-of-living crisis and improved software drew them back. That helped the company to boost revenues. In 2022 it reported its first full-year profits. On Tuesday it releases its latest quarterly ones.

Uber’s San Francisco rival, Lyft, which reports its results next week, has had a challenging time too. In February it reported disappointing quarterly results and said that to help compete with Uber it would lower fares, eating into its profit margins. Its share price tumbled. Demand in Lyft’s core market, on America’s west coast, has also been slower to recover.

So far this year Lyft’s share price has inched up by 13%, whereas Uber’s has jumped by 92%. Investors seem to think that Uber is winning. Today’s results will give further clues.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
France ends its energy support
French consumers have been fairly well-protected from the high energy prices that have battered Europe, thanks to government caps on how far household-energy bills can rise. That has also held down overall inflation, which in July slowed to 5%, the lowest annual rate for 16 months and below the euro-zone average. From Tuesday, however, French households will feel a fresh squeeze.

Energy-price caps have cost the state billions of euros. So the government has been gradually withdrawing subsidies, introduced in 2021, including those that kept a lid on increases to the price of motor fuel. The latest move will allow electricity bills to rise by a further 10%.

Each time a cap is lifted, and households face bigger bills, there are worries about the potential for social unrest. Politicians are achingly aware that it was an increase in the carbon tax on fuel that sparked the volatile gilets jaunes (yellow jackets) protest movement in 2018.


PHOTO: HUGO GLENDINNING/BOOKER PRIZE FO
Britain’s booming book industry
With the announcement of the prestigious Booker-prize longlist, Tuesday marks one of the highlights in the global publishing calendar. A “Booker Dozen”—ie, 12 or 13 books—will be selected from the novels published in Britain and Ireland between October 2022 and September 2023. For authors and publishers, getting work on the list is a boon. Last year Graeme Macrae Burnet saw week-on-week sales of the hardback edition of his book, “Case Study”, shoot up by 6,400% following its inclusion.

Publishers are dependent on a few hits to drive profits. Tim Harford, an economist, studied sales of 42,000 titles released by ten major publishers and found that 15% sold fewer than 12 copies. Nevertheless the British publishing industry is in an ebullient mood. According to the Publishers Association, overall sales, including academic and educational publishing, were worth £6.9bn ($8.9bn) last year, up by 4% from 2021. A total of 669m physical books were sold, the most ever.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: In the post-war era, who was the first African-American to play major league baseball?

Monday: Oscar Wilde wrote that “I can resist everything except” what?

A smile is the chosen vehicle of all ambiguities.

Herman Melville
