The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (23:35 GMT+1 / 06:35 Hong Kong)

Ukraine and Russia signed a deal on Friday in Istanbul to resume grain exports from Ukraine’s Black Sea ports. Brokered by the UN and Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, the agreement should unblock about 18m tonnes of Ukrainian grain awaiting export. Russia’s blockade of Ukraine’s ports has sent global food prices surging and exacerbated world hunger.

Herbert Diess was ousted as chief executive of Volkswagen, following clashes with the company’s works council, which represents its employees. Mr Diess had tried to re-imagine VW as an electric-car maker, and to impose steep cost cuts. He will be replaced by Oliver Blume, CEO of Volkswagen’s Porsche brand.

Steve Bannon was convicted of two charges of contempt of Congress for defying a subpoena from the House committee investigating the Capitol riot on January 6th 2021. Mr Bannon, a former adviser to Donald Trump, faces between 30 days and one year in prison, as well as fines up to $100,000, on each count. He will be sentenced in October.

The Biden administration authorised another weapons delivery to Ukraine, worth $270m. An American official said that hundreds of Russian soldiers are dying each day in the war; earlier the CIA estimated that 15,000 had been killed so far. Separately, Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, told the Wall Street Journal that he would not countenance any ceasefire that let Russia retain territory it had taken.

Gavin Newsom, California’s governor, approved legislation authorising private citizens to sue people who violate the state’s gun laws. Individuals will be able to seek damages starting at $10,000 from illegal-firearms dealers. The enforcement mechanism mimics one devised in Texas to target abortion providers. The Supreme Court let Texas’s law take effect; Mr Newsom dared the court to block California’s.

Euro-zone business activity went into reverse in July for the first time since February 2021. S&P Global’s flash composite purchasing managers’ index, which measures both service sector and manufacturing companies in the euro zone, dropped to a 17-month low of 49.4 in July, a fall from 52 in June. Economists had expected a slight decline to 51, but the drop below 50, which indicates contraction, was unexpected.

Riot police removed protesters from the area around the president’s office in Colombo, Sri Lanka’s capital, hours after Ranil Wickremesinghe was sworn in as president. Demonstrators have camped out there for months amid an economic crisis. There are fears that the show of force will reignite unrest. Meanwhile Dinesh Gunawardena, a senior lawmaker, was sworn in as the new prime minister.

Word of the week: lanweilou, a Chinese term for unfinished buildings. Across China people are halting mortgage payments on such homes to protest construction delays. Read the full story.

A deal for Ukraine’s grain

PHOTO: EPA
The deal comes not a moment too soon. On Saturday the world will be watching to see if an agreement struck by Ukraine and Russia to resume grain exports from Ukraine’s Black Sea ports will stick. If it does, the accord should ease world hunger—50m people are on the brink of starvation, warns the UN—and inflation. Indeed, wheat prices fell by 6% on the news.

The pact creates a “joint co-ordination centre” in Istanbul, staffed by the belligerents as well as Turkey and the UN. It will monitor cargo ships transiting through Ukrainian ports, and inspect them for weapons.

But the limited agreement, which comes up for renewal every 120 days, will not solve the food crisis. Grain prices are down by one-third from their peak earlier this year, but the stuff is still more than 40% dearer than in January 2020. And as the war is likely to go on for months, no one knows if the deal will hold. Indeed, many wonder if it is too good to be true. After all, Russia is not known for keeping to its word in Ukraine.

Thailand’s prime minister faces another confidence vote

PHOTO: REUTERS
Politics has a habit of repeating itself in Thailand. Opposition parties have attempted to oust Prayuth Chan-Ocha, the prime minister, in votes of confidence three times since his party was elected in 2019. (Mr Prayuth initially seized power in a military coup five years before.) Last Tuesday the opposition began debating yet another motion of no-confidence, and the vote takes place on Saturday. Parliamentarians accuse Mr Prayut and ten members of his cabinet of economic mismanagement and of tolerating corruption in government.

Mr Prayut is likely to survive this vote, just as he has all the others. His coalition controls 253 parliamentary seats, 14 more than the number he needs to win. At best, the outcome may lead to a cabinet reshuffle. That may not trouble the opposition. Elections must be held before next March. Mr Prayut’s rivals will seize every opportunity to smear their opponent until then.

Manifesta comes to Kosovo

PHOTO: MANIFESTA 14
In 1996, when the first edition of Manifesta took place in Rotterdam, the territories of the former Yugoslavia were at war. This week the 14th iteration opens in Pristina, the capital of Kosovo—making it the first city in the western Balkans to host Europe’s nomadic art biennial. Derelict urban sites have been cleared and tidied into new public spaces. Brutalist structures associated with the Yugoslav era, including the Grand Hotel and Palace of Youth and Sports, have been reimagined as exhibition venues.

Of the 103 participating artists, over one-third are Kosovar and another quarter come from the rest of the western Balkans. This is an unusually regional focus for an international art event. That reflects the organisers’ commitment to the local art scene, but also acknowledges its isolation. Citizens of Kosovo wishing to enter the European Union must tackle a lengthy and expensive visa-application process. The country’s artists thus struggle to participate in the international art scene. Instead, Manifesta is bringing Europe’s art professionals to Kosovo.

Why human egg cells don’t spoil

PHOTO: SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Which came first, the chicken or the egg? For humans, both come at once: baby girls are born with all of the egg cells (or “oocytes”) they will ever have. Decades later, they must still be capable of spawning new life. This remarkable ability is little understood. But new research in Nature, a journal, has unpicked the secret of egg cells’ longevity. Essentially, oocytes put themselves into a state of dormancy by suppressing normal cell metabolism.

Metabolism powers cells, but in doing so produces certain volatile chemicals. These mutate DNA and eventually kill cells. However, oocytes keep their engines running at such a low hum that they produce precious few of these dangerous chemicals. It is as if they are left on standby—for up to 40 or 50 years. This insight could improve success rates in assisted reproduction. Moreover, it highlights how shamefully understudied egg cells are. After all, everybody started out as one.

Weekend profile: the climatologists transforming how we discuss weather

PHOTO: CAMERA PRESS
“People don’t have to die in their tens of thousands,” says Friederike Otto, with a touch of exasperation. In 2014 Dr Otto co-founded the World Weather Attribution (WWA) initiative, a collective of climate researchers and statisticians that has transformed the understanding of extreme weather events, such as the remarkable trio of heatwaves that hit Europe, China and America this week.

The idea was born of frustration with the academic distinction between climate and weather. “Climate” denotes macro, long-term trends; “weather” is what’s going on outside your window. Most people are more interested in daily weather patterns than decadal or even longer-term patterns. In the 2010s a group of researchers decided that to make the world understand why climate change mattered, they needed to introduce it into conversations about the weather, including the forecasts people see on television.

Thus was the WWA conceived. The group works with the Red Cross Red Crescent’s Climate Centre, which gathers data on the number of people affected by any given climate event. If the number passes a certain threshold, Dr Otto and her collaborators, Sjoukje Philip and Sarah Kew of the Dutch meteorology institute, activate the WWA community. They canvass “everyone we know” to form an ad-hoc group of expert modellers. The exercise is, on the face of it, simple: to simulate two atmospheres, one with all the accumulated greenhouse-gas emissions of the last two centuries, and one that is unsullied. By comparing these two worlds, they can say whether a specific event is more or less likely to happen in a climate-changed atmosphere.

This has led to headline-grabbing statements: that the northern European floods last year were made up to nine times more likely by anthropogenic climate change, the Siberian heatwave of 2020 was many thousand times more likely, and the Pacific Northwest heatwave of 2021 would have been virtually impossible without historical emissions. Such statements, and the underlying methodology, are now part of the climate vernacular. They are also applied elsewhere, such as in legal disputes where people or communities seek compensation for climate-change-induced damages.

Extreme heat is one of the most straightforward impacts of global warming, and virtually every contemporary heatwave was made worse or more likely by emissions, or both. But Dr Otto worries that this engenders fatalism. “Yes it’s climate change…but we are also not powerless to do something about it,” she says. “That…is what’s missing in the conversation.”

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Cryptic clues

1 down Thug hiding in a skunk hole? (10)

1 across King caught in falsehoods for social currency (5)

2 across Stress rising, in part, might lead to being prescribed this? (4)

3 across Originally Biden and Manchin’s authority (5)

Factual clues

1 down Rumoured soon-to-be co-combatant (10)

1 across What Latin American politicians increasingly want? (5)

2 across A medicine with a mysterious mechanism of action (4)

3 across A victim of Congress’s climate inaction (5)


The winner’s of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Jin-Hong Park, Suwon, South Korea

North America: Ashley Easterling, Bay St. Louis, United States

Central and South America: Carlos Flexa Ribeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Europe: Julius Kintzinger, Hamburg, Germany

Africa: Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya

Oceania: Ian Harland, Wellington, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of Charlie Watts, Patty Hearst, Linus Pauling, I Love Lucy and Woodstock. They are all characters in the “Peanuts” cartoon strip: Charlie Brown, Peppermint Patty, Linus, Lucy and Woodstock.

The more one does and sees and feels, the more one is able to do.

Amelia Earhart
