The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (23:06 GMT+1 / 06:06 Hong Kong)

Ukraine hinted that its forces were responsible for Tuesday’s explosions at a military base in Russian-occupied Crimea, located far from the war’s frontlines. A presidential adviser, Mykhailo Podolyak, predicted more such attacks. Separately, the self-proclaimed leader of the breakaway Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine pledged to develop “equally beneficial bilateral co-operation” in a letter to North Korea, which in July became the third country in the world to recognise the separatist-controlled region’s independence.

Israel and Turkey agreed to restore full diplomatic ties, ending a long standoff. Ambassadors will be reinstated for the first time since they were expelled in 2018 over the killing of 60 Palestinians by Israeli forces during a protest. A visit to Turkey by Israel’s president, Isaac Herzog, in March marked the beginnings of a thaw, followed by a pledge to discuss restarting direct flights by Israeli airlines.

Mike Pence, America’s former vice-president, asked Republicans to cease attacks on law-enforcement agencies over the FBI’s investigation into Mar-a-Lago, Donald Trump’s home. Many in the party have raged against the raid, with some calling to “defund” the FBI. Mr Pence called these “just as wrong as calls to defund the police”. He also said that, if asked, he would consider participating in the efforts of the House select committee investigating Mr Trump’s role in the January 6th attack on the Capitol.

Dozens were feared dead following a large explosion inside a mosque in Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan, during evening prayers on Wednesday. There was no official word on the number of casualties or perpetrator. Last week Islamic State claimed responsibility for the assassination of a prominent pro-Taliban cleric in a bomb attack in Kabul.

Rochelle Walensky, the director of America’s Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, called for a reorganisation of the public-health agency given its clumsy response to the covid-19 pandemic. An external report found that public messaging was often confusing, and recommended that lab data and scientific studies be published faster.

Uniper, a German utility firm, reported a staggering loss of €12.4bn ($12.6bn) for the first half of 2022, pointing to Europe’s worsening energy crisis. The company, which is Germany’s largest importer of Russian gas, attributes over half of its net loss to the reduced gas flows, which have forced it to cover the shortfall in the spot market at higher prices. It received a €15bn bailout from the German government last month.

China will send troops to Russia to participate in Russian-led military exercises, China’s defence ministry said. The joint war games, located in Russia’s east, will also involve Belarus, India, Mongolia and Tajikistan. China’s participation in the exercises, said the ministry, was “unrelated to the current international and regional situation”.

Fact of the day: 400,000, a conservative estimate for how many hectares of Britain’s land are taken up by private gardens. Read the full story.

Turkey sets foot in Ukraine

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Turkey’s president has been immersed in the war in Ukraine as a mediator. But on Thursday Recep Tayyip Erdogan will visit the country for the first time since Russia’s invasion. In Lviv, a long way from the front line, he will have his first face-to-face meeting with Volodymyr Zelensky, his Ukrainian counterpart. António Guterres, the UN secretary-general, will also be there.

Turkey has won kudos for brokering, along with the UN, a deal between Ukraine and Russia to restart grain exports through the Black Sea. Turkish-made Bayraktar drones have also helped the Ukrainian army push back the Russian offensive. But Mr Erdogan is performing a delicate balancing act. On August 5th he alarmed western governments by meeting with Vladimir Putin and signalling that Turkey was open for Russian business.

As for Mr Zelensky, he will want to probe his guests about expanding the grain deal into a wider negotiation to end the conflict. He will also bring up the risks around the Zaporizhia nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest, where fighting has sparked fears of a nuclear disaster.

A new look for Estée Lauder

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
The past year has been hard for beauty firms, including Estée Lauder, which reports results on Thursday. The American company has been hammered by lockdown-induced slowdowns in China, which by last year accounted for fully 36% of its revenues. Estée Lauder’s stock has shed a quarter of its value since the start of the year, and further decline is expected.

It may be time for a bolder look. Estée Lauder’s past strategy has been to acquire minority stakes in smaller beauty companies. But its eyes are now set on Tom Ford, a fashion brand worth $3bn. Should it succeed, the acquisition would be Estée Lauder’s largest yet. It would also be its first foray into luxury fashion, following in the footsteps of L’Oréal, a rival cosmetics giant, which bought Mugler, a perfume seller, in 2019. Tom Ford’s luxury cosmetics range could help Estée Lauder strengthen its position in the fast-growing prestige beauty sector. It would also boost its top line, and brush off some of its upsets in China.

Serbia and Kosovo try, again, to find harmony

PHOTO: EPA
On Thursday Aleksandar Vucic, the Serbian president, and Albin Kurti, the Kosovar prime minister, will meet Josep Borrell, the European Union’s foreign-policy chief, in Brussels. The most important issue is the contested status of a proposed association that would grant some autonomy to Serbian-majority municipalities inside Kosovo.

Tensions are once again rising between Serbia and its former province. One of the triggers was a decision last month by Kosovo’s government to oblige Serbian citizens travelling to Kosovo to receive temporary ID cards in place of their passports. Serbian officials protested against the policy, and it was eventually postponed—but not before social media exploded with rumours of a Serbian invasion.

NATO soldiers in Kosovo have a mandate to defend the country. That makes an invasion highly unlikely. But the same goes for political progress. Messrs Kurti and Vucic loathe each other, and ten years of EU-sponsored talks are no longer producing results. Few think this round will be much different.

Adjusting England’s A-levels

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
During the pandemic 18-year-olds in England were spared from sitting A-levels, the usual school-leavers’ exams. They were judged instead by their teachers, who marked their charges generously. Grades shot up, even though most pupils were learning less than usual.

The government wants to correct that trend this year. A-level grades released on Thursday are, in aggregate, likely to be lower than those doled out during the pandemic. But grade boundaries will be set so that this year’s cohort still does slightly better than those who last sat these exams in 2019.

Even if bringing down grades is sensible, it will be a jarring adjustment for students. Many will have done worse than their teachers led them to expect. Universities that took on more students during the pandemic, thanks to those inflated grades, are now trying to correct that swell by offering fewer places this year. And the return of rigorous testing will only highlight uncomfortable disparities between schools that managed to cope during the pandemic, and those in which a lot of teaching was missed.

Humans are destroying carbon dating

PHOTO: SPL
When carbon dating was discovered in 1946, it revolutionised archaeology. The technique relies on the principle that living things absorb atmospheric carbon, including carbon-14, a radioactive variant. When an organism dies, its level of carbon-14 begins to fall as the isotope decays. So the remaining amount detected in a relic—accounting for the concentration in the atmosphere—can yield an estimate of the time that has passed since its death.

But human activity is rendering the method useless. The end of above-ground atomic-weapons testing has seen carbon-14 concentrations in the atmosphere fall from their spike during the cold war. And surging carbon-dioxide emissions dilute its concentration even further, so that modern objects have the same levels as those from 100 years ago. This makes it harder to date anything from human remains to aged whiskies. By 2050 scientists reckon a modern item will have the same carbon timestamp as something from the Middle Ages. Carbon dating will soon be retired. For now it will simply be replaced with guesswork.


The world is not ours to keep. We hold it in trust for future generations.

Kofi Annan
