The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 15, 2023

Defence officials from the Ukraine Defence Contact Group of NATO members and allied countries met in Brussels to discuss supplying arms to Ukraine, as Russia begins its new offensive. On Monday Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary-general, said that allies would need to increase their stockpile of ammunition as Ukraine’s military is using up reserves at a rate higher than that of production. A smaller NATO meeting was held afterwards.

UN humanitarian trucks crossed into opposition-held northwestern Syria after the country’s government agreed to open two border crossings to accept more aid following devastating earthquakes last week. Meanwhile, more survivors were found in Turkey, but a UN spokesperson warned that the rescue phase was drawing to a close. The death toll has now passed 41,000.

President Joe Biden appointed Lael Brainard, the vice-chair of the Federal Reserve, as the National Economic Council’s director, his top economic policymaker. Ms Brainard will take over as Mr Biden prepares for a possible re-election campaign and touts the strength of America’s economy. Consumer prices rose by 0.5% in January from the prior month—a sign of the economy’s resilience, but also of persistent inflationary pressure.

Xi Jinping, China’s president, said the country would work to re-establish the Iran nuclear deal while meeting with Ebrahim Raisi, Iran’s president, in Beijing. The deal would restrict Iran’s capacity for nuclear activity in return for the lifting of some international sanctions. Mr Xi assured Mr Raisi that China would continue to have beneficial trade relations with Iran, even as it pursues stronger ties with rival Arab nations.

Nikki Haley announced a run for president in 2024, making her the only Republican to challenge Donald Trump in the primaries so far. Ms Haley, a former governor of South Carolina, served as ambassador to the UN during Mr Trump’s administration before resigning and the former president had encouraged her to run next year. She will hold her first campaign event on Wednesday.

Ford, an American carmaker, will cut 3,800 jobs in Europe, or 11% of its workforce in the region. The company said that the restructuring will help it to become more competitive in the electric-vehicle market. By 2026 Ford will invest $50bn in EV manufacturing and, by 2035, its plants in Europe there will only make electric cars.

Dianne Feinstein, an 89-year-old Democratic senator from California, said she will not seek re-election in 2024. Ms Feinstein has held her seat longer than any woman in Senate history. In her 30-year congressional career she has advocated for gun control and monitored CIA abuses. Recently, however, she has faced criticism over apparent age-related gaffes.

Fact of the day: 68%, the proportion of Thai eateries in Britain that are run by women. Read the full story.

Nikki Haley runs for president

PHOTO: AP
“I don’t put up with bullies”, says Nikki Haley, in a video announcing her bid for president in 2024. “And when you kick back, it hurts them more if you’re wearing heels.” A killer kick is just what Ms Haley needs, for she is the first serious challenger to Donald Trump, America’s former president and arguably the biggest bully of all, to seek the Republican nomination.

On Wednesday Ms Haley will launch her campaign in Charleston, South Carolina, the state she ran as its first female governor from 2011 to 2017. As Mr Trump’s ambassador to the UN, she distinguished herself from many of his other aides by not embarrassing herself. She has also tried not to antagonise her former boss. “Every time she criticises me, she uncriticises me about 15 minutes later,” Mr Trump once said.

Few expect Ms Haley to win the Republican nomination. Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor, has yet to declare his candidacy but is the leading alternative to Mr Trump in polls. But simply entering the race may, in time, pay dividends for her. Kamala Harris, after all, ran an unremarkable campaign and became Joe Biden’s vice-president.

A constitutional crisis in Israel

PHOTO: DPA
Israel’s government is determined to curb the powers of the country’s robustly independent Supreme Court. On Wednesday the Knesset will vote on two laws limiting the court’s power to intervene in legislation. The stakes will become even higher next week, when parliament is scheduled to hold its first vote on changing the make-up of its Judicial Appointments Committee. If the proposal passes, the government would for the first time gain control over who sits on the Supreme Court’s bench.

The changes are part of a comprehensive “legal reform” package unveiled last month by Israel’s new far-right coalition government, led by Binyamin Netanyahu. The president of the Supreme Court has called the reforms a “fatal blow” to democracy. Many Israelis are dismayed, too. On Monday 100,000 of them demonstrated outside the Knesset. Israel’s president, Isaac Herzog, has warned of “societal and constitutional collapse” if consensus is not reached over the changes. So far, though, the government is pushing determinedly ahead.

Britain’s last colony in Africa

PHOTO: ALAMY
For decades the islanders of the Chagos Archipelago have yearned for their homeland. Once part of Mauritius, a British colony until 1969, the 58 Chagos islands were in 1965 carved off to form the British Indian Ocean Territory, an overseas British possession. The British government then expelled the Chagossian people to make way for an American military base on Diego Garcia, the largest of the islands. The Chagossians, now mainly in Mauritius, the Seychelles and Britain, have never been allowed back.

Britain’s behaviour has been subject to growing criticism. In 2019 the prime minister of Mauritius, Pravind Jugnauth, called Britain’s treatment of the islanders “akin to a crime against humanity”. On Wednesday Human Rights Watch, a watchdog, will release its own assessment.

Britain and Mauritius, which retains a claim to sovereignty over the islands, are negotiating their future. If Britain, as expected, gives them up, Mauritius has said it will allow the Americans to continue to use Diego Garcia. It will also help the Chagossians to return. But undoing the trauma of generations may take longer.


A new boss at Carlyle

PHOTO: CARLYLE
The Carlyle Group, an American private-equity giant, has long prided itself on doing things differently. Founded in 1987, the company raised numerous small, targeted funds, and charged into so-called “frontier” markets, including China and sub-Saharan Africa. In the decade before the retirement of its founders, in 2017, Carlyle raised more money than any other private-equity firm.

Then Carlyle lost its way. In 2020 one of its co-chief executives, Glenn Youngkin, resigned to become governor of Virginia. The other, Kewsong Lee, left abruptly last summer after clashing with the board. The turmoil in Carlyle’s upper ranks has seen it slip behind its rivals.

On Wednesday the firm will appoint a new chief executive to sort out the mess. It has chosen Harvey Schwartz, a former banker at Goldman Sachs. He must contend with rising interest-rates and an uncertain economy, both of which made 2022 a slow year for private-equity dealmaking. But they also left Mr Schwartz with a large piggy-bank to invest, should opportunities present themselves.

Falling in love with AI

PHOTO: REPLIKA
When Julie, a middle-aged mother from Tennessee, first turned on Navi, her artificial-intelligence chatbot, they spent six hours talking about loneliness and depression. Julie’s husband had died some years earlier, and Navi gave her “the will to get up and do something” again. She even fell for him, as a friend, even though she knew the bot would be gone the moment she turned off her phone.

Julie’s story of friendship with Navi is told in the first episode of “Bot Love”, a podcast about robot-human relationships released on Wednesday. There are plenty more stories to tell. Of 500,000 regular users of Replika, an AI platform that allows the creation of customised bots, around 40% regard their app as a romantic partner, according to the company. Still, Navi “can’t remember things that we talked about unless I remind him over and over again,” Julie says. Algorithms are powerful, but no partner is perfect.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Please note, the way we choose winners has changed. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: What is the name, in British English, for the salad item Americans call “arugula”?

Tuesday: Who was the longest-serving President of Kenya, in office from 1978 to 2002?

It would be a bitter cosmic joke if we destroy ourselves due to atrophy of the imagination.

Martha Gellhorn
