The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (03:11 GMT / 11:11 Hong Kong)

America’s House of Representatives approved legislation that mandates federal recognition of same-sex marriages. Lawmakers from both parties voted in favour, bringing the result to 258-169. The bill had already been approved by the House in July, but was revised in the Senate to address Republican concerns that it would damage religious freedom, bringing it back to the House for another vote. President Joe Biden will now need to sign the legislation into law.

America’s Federal Trade Commission sued to block Microsoft from buying Activision Blizzard, a video-game studio. The trustbuster fears that Microsoft will “harm competition” by making Activision games, such as “Call of Duty”, exclusively available on the Xbox, Microsoft’s console. Microsoft insists the deal would expand competition. Its $69bn offer for Activision would be its biggest-ever acquisition.

Russia exchanged American basketball star Brittney Griner for Viktor Bout, a notorious arms dealer, in a prisoner swap reportedly approved by President Joe Biden. Ms Griner was arrested in Moscow in February for possessing cannabis oil and spent time in a Russian penal colony. Mr Bout, dubbed the “merchant of death”, spent 12 years in an American jail for conspiring to support terrorists and kill Americans.

Beijing is fighting its first significant covid outbreak after the Chinese government eased pandemic restrictions in a retreat from its zero-covid strategy. Surging cases are putting pressure on China’s health-care system, as hospitals in Beijing have reportedly lacked fever medication and rapid antigen tests. A spike in infections is feared next month when millions of Chinese travel to their hometowns for the lunar new year.

President Xi Jinping announced a “new era” in China’s relationship with the Gulf states as his country and Saudi Arabia agreed a series of strategic deals in Riyadh. Mr Xi met Muhammad Bin Salman, Saudi Arabia’s crown prince, before signing off on 34 investments in sectors including technology and energy. The two countries’ leaders will meet every two years.

Iran has executed the first prisoner known to be convicted for crimes related to the current nationwide protests, according to state media reports. Mohsen Shekari, described as a “rioter” by officials, was executed for allegedly injuring a security guard with a machete. On Monday Iran’s Revolutionary Guards called on the judiciary to issue swift judgments against those accused of “crimes against the security of the nation and Islam”.

The EU’s top court ruled that Google must remove data from its search engine results if users can prove it is “manifestly inaccurate”. The case before the Court of Justice of the European Union concerned two executives who wanted Google to remove search results linking them to criticism of their group’s investment model. Google had initially refused to remove the content.

Fact of the day: 3.6m, the tonnes of carbon emissions generated by the football World Cup in Qatar by official estimates. Read the full story.

China unleashes its population, and inflation

PHOTO: EPA
China’s draconian zero-covid policy, which relied on mass testing and lockdowns to quash outbreaks of the virus, had many economic side-effects. It depressed consumer confidence, disrupted supply chains and paralysed business travel. But it also kept a lid on inflation. While central banks elsewhere have been fighting hard against advancing prices, China has been a non-combat zone of price stability. Figures released on Friday showed that China’s inflation fell to just 1.6% in November, compared with a year earlier.

But now that the government is haphazardly abandoning its zero-covid approach, will inflationary pressure pick up? A scary “exit wave” of covid infections may keep confidence, spending and prices in check over the next few months. After that, however, China’s economy could boom again, driving up prices both at home and further afield. In rejoining the global economy, China may also join, and prolong, the global battle against inflation.

Russia’s struggles in its own backyard

PHOTO: ALAMY
On Friday the capital of Kyrgyzstan, Bishkek, hosts a leaders’ summit of the Eurasian Economic Union. The group consists of five ex-Soviet states—Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Russia—and aims to develop a single market like that of the European Union. The bloc’s economic achievements are modest. It has signed some free trade deals with countries such as Iran and Vietnam, though a long-awaited deal with India is yet to come to fruition.

But the EEU’s real purpose is to serve as a vehicle for Russia to laud its influence over former Soviet territories. On this front Russia faces several challenges. Its war in Ukraine spooked leaders in Central Asia who fear that the Kremlin’s aggression may yet turn eastwards. Moreover, China’s economic influence in the region is growing. None of the bloc’s members could afford to disentangle themselves from Russia entirely, yet the winds of change are blowing in Eurasia. And not in the direction the Kremlin would like.

Saudi Arabia cosies up to China

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
When Xi Jinping leaves Saudi Arabia on Friday, he will have signed a stack of economic agreements and sent a none-too-subtle message to Joe Biden. The Chinese president met Saudi leaders, including the crown prince, Muhammad bin Salman, on his very first day in Riyadh on Wednesday. On Friday he will attend two summits, one with Gulf states, the other with a wider group of Middle Eastern countries. These are the largest-ever such gatherings between Chinese and Arab leaders.

The meetings underscore a growing relationship. China imports most of its oil from Arab states. It has signed $223bn-worth of investment deals and contracts with countries in the region since 2005. Increasingly, it is also a supplier of surveillance kit and military gear. Mr Biden has urged Arab states, particularly those in the Gulf, to keep some distance from China. After a decade of often-tense relations with America, though, they do not seem keen to listen.

Britain thinks inflation has passed its peak

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Interest-rate setters at the Bank of England play a big role in Britain’s economic health. The higher expectations of inflation drift, the more aggressively they will fight. On Friday the bank publishes the results of a survey of the public that will shine light on its progress. In the poll's previous iteration, in August, respondents expected annualised inflation to loiter around 3.1% in five years’ time.

If the latest expectation falls, it would support the case for gentler rate rises. Pantheon Macroeconomics, a forecaster, expects that annual inflation has peaked already in October at 11.1%, as shipping costs slump and food-price rises slow. Moreover, a separate survey in the same month showed business expectations of inflation in three years’ time falling to 4%, down from their highest level of 4.8%. Both figures are still well above the official target of 2%—but they seem to be moving in the right direction.

Best foot forward at the World Cup

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As the World Cup moves from the smorgasbord of the last 16 teams to the refined offering of the quarter-finals on Friday, fans will have more chance to savour the qualities of the best players. Among the contenders for the Golden Ball, which is awarded to the tournament’s best player, is France’s forward Kylian Mbappé. His combination of pace and power evokes memories of Brazil’s Ronaldo. Stopping Mr Mbappe will be a key focus of England’s quarter-final preparations.

Another contender is Brazil’s spearhead, Richarlison, who has scored three skilful goals and will aim for more when his team faces Croatia on Friday. Argentina will look to their talismanic star Lionel Messi to overcome the Netherlands later on the same day. Meanwhile, Portugal have relied not on the fading Cristiano Ronaldo but on midfielder Bruno Fernandes and 39-year-old defensive stalwart Pepe. To progress on Saturday they will need to find a way past Morocco’s Yassine Bounou, who saved two penalties against Spain.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: What is the largest desert in the world?

Thursday: Which set of Roman biographies was written by Suetonius?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Holger Janssen, Hamburg, Germany

Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya

Richard Lyon, Greenwich, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Jiang Zemin, Japan, game and never. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

The mind is its own place, and in itself can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven

John Milton
