The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 23, 2023

Ten people were killed and at least ten others injured by a gunman in Monterey Park, on the eastern edge of Los Angeles. The victims had gathered to celebrate the Chinese lunar new year in a ballroom-dancing venue. The suspect later shot himself in a van after being surrounded by police. The motive for the attack is unknown. It was one of the worst mass-shootings in California’s modern history.

America’s justice department found a new batch of classified documents at President Joe Biden’s private residence. After a 13-hour search, officials seized documents from Mr Biden’s time in the Senate and as vice-president. The discovery is the latest in a series of such findings that has caused a furore over Mr Biden’s mishandling of government files. Earlier this month Merrick Garland, the attorney-general, appointed a special counsel to review Mr Biden’s case.

Germany’s foreign minister said it “would not stand in the way” if Poland sent German-made Leopard tanks to Ukraine. The move signals a shift in attitude in Berlin, which has so far resisted heavy diplomatic pressure to send its tanks to Kyiv, or allow others to do so. Earlier Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, said he had not ruled out the possibility of sending Leclerc tanks to Ukraine.

New Zealand’s ruling Labour Party formally elected Chris Hipkins to succeed Jacinda Ardern as leader, and thus the new prime minister. Mr Hipkins, currently the minister for police, public service and education, will be sworn in on Wednesday. The charismatic Ms Ardern resigned as prime minister last Thursday, complaining that she has nothing “left in the tank.”

Thousands demonstrated across America on the 50th anniversary of Roe v Wade, the Supreme Court decision that legalised abortion. Around 200 marches took place in 46 states to protest against the court’s reversal of Roe last June. Since then 12 states have passed near-total bans on abortion, while others have tightened restrictions. President Joe Biden called a woman’s right to choose “non-negotiable” and urged Congress to codify Roe.

The chairman of Britain’s ruling Conservative Party faced increasing pressure to resign over his tax affairs. Sir Iain Duncan Smith, a former leader of the party, urged Nadhim Zahawi to release the “absolute facts” about the case. Mr Zahawi has said that the tax authorities accepted that he had made a “careless” error in not paying his tax in full.

“With a heavy heart and much sorrow” Binyamin Netanyahu complied with a high court ruling to sack a senior cabinet minister with a criminal record, Aryeh Deri, head of Shas Party. On Saturday, tens of thousands of Israelis protested against Mr Netanyahu’s plans to reform the country’s judiciary. He is trying to curb the powers of the Supreme Court by tightening political control over judicial appointments.

Fact of the day: 60%, the proportion of horses that were owned by Elizabeth II that have been sold at auction since her death in September. Read the full story.

China enters a new covid era

PHOTO: AFP
Three years ago the 11m people of Wuhan, a Chinese city, were the first to be locked down to stop the spread of a strange new virus. Covid-19 had actually emerged weeks earlier, but authorities played down its dangers, allowing millions to leave before the city and its surrounding province were sealed. But in 2023, after China abruptly dropped strict pandemic controls, the country’s rulers are intent on promoting a return to normality. Celebrations of the lunar new year holidays began over the weekend.

For unknown numbers of Chinese it is a more sombre new year. Official death tolls stand at around 70,000 between December 8th and January 19th. The true number is far higher, according to exhausted funeral workers and doctors. Millions heading to home towns and villages hope they will not infect elderly relatives, though it may help that many villagers have already had the virus. An exhausted country is ready to move on.

Europe’s happy shoppers

PHOTO: DPA
In 2022, Europe’s consumers presented economists with a puzzle. Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, consumer confidence—measured through surveys on households’ financial situation and their overall economic outlook—tanked. Europeans worried about the war’s impact on the rest of Europe, high energy costs and potential economic hardship. Economic forecasters feared a recession.

Yet spending in shops held up fairly well. That was because the labour market remained strong, the post-pandemic spending boom still had legs and governments transferred billions to households to help pay energy bills. Since then, prices for gas, power and fuel have come down to pre-war levels and a severe energy crisis has been avoided. The release of new data on consumer sentiment on Monday should reflect that and show that Europeans are bullish. The European consumer is not exactly known for pushing the world economy forward, but has nonetheless proved remarkably resilient in this crisis.


Will Vladimir Putin order another mobilisation?

PHOTO: REUTERS
As the West promises more heavy weapons to Ukraine, rumours abound that Vladimir Putin will soon announce a second wave of mobilisation. Russia has not deployed all of the roughly 300,000 men recruited in the first drive, yet a new call-up would still be needed to sustain another large-scale offensive, which Ukraine reckons will begin in the spring. The recent appointment of Valery Gerasimov, Russia’s senior general, to take command of the invasion may also signal that a fresh attack is coming.

For the offensive to stand a chance, claims Ukraine, Russia would have to call up half a million more men. That would be politically difficult. The first mobilisation sparked widespread protests in September; an estimated 700,000-800,000 men fled the country in one month. Families have become only more unsure about sending their loved ones off to war. Mr Putin is committed to his fight. His people will have to consider the costs—not that anyone is asking their opinion.

India’s banking boom

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
For years India’s economic growth was hindered by a rotten banking sector, plagued by bad loans and shoddy management. Now that constraint is easing. Banks’ credit growth rose to a ten-year high in December. Earlier in 2022, the share of bad loans fell to a seven-year low. The turnaround is a consequence of several factors. Government reforms to clean up balance-sheets have worked. A popular mobile-payments platform has brought more funds into the banking system.

Private banks are flourishing. On Saturday ICICI, the country’s second-biggest private bank, reported a 34% year-on-year increase in profits for the last quarter of 2022. Axis Bank, the third biggest, which reports results on Monday, is expected to post an even bigger increase. A global economic slowdown will hurt momentum, but the central bank is not too worried. It predicts that, in the worst possible scenario this year, Indian banks will remain resilient. In the best case, they will thrive.

Art in the desert

PHOTO: DIRIYAH BIENNALE FOUNDATION
With its famous undulating roof line, the Canopy Terminal at Jeddah airport is often the first view that pilgrims enjoy when they land in Saudi Arabia for the Hajj. From Monday, it will also be home for three months to the first Islamic Arts Biennale, featuring an indoor exhibition that focuses on qiblah or the “sacred direction” and an open-air show about hijrah, or migration, that began with the journey that the Prophet Muhammad took from Mecca to Medina in 622. Forty-four artists have created works that examine how Islam’s most sacred sites give Muslims around the world a sense of community and belonging.

Politically, the Biennale is the latest expression of soft power by the crown prince, Muhammad bin Salman, and his cousin, Badr bin Farhan Al-Saud, the culture minister. They are keen to use art to project a gentler image for the kingdom after the murder of Jamal Khashoggi, a journalist, and a huge increase in public executions in 2022.

Daily quiz

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: The Blue Grotto is a feature of which resort island in the bay of Naples?

Sometimes great injustices may be inflicted on the minority when the majority is in the pursuit of a great and just cause.

Paul Robeson
