The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 8, 2023
Jerome Powell, chairman of America’s Federal Reserve, said interest rates will likely have to be raised “higher than previously anticipated”. After a record string of three-quarter-point increases from June to November, the Fed slowed the pace of tightening. But a resilient jobs market and rebounding consumer demand have hurt the central bank’s efforts to rein in inflation.

American intelligence suggests that a pro-Ukrainian group blew up the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines, which carried gas from Russia to western Europe, according to the New York Times. Officials said it was unclear who directed the attack in September, though there is no evidence linking it to Ukraine’s government. Die Zeit, a German newspaper, reported that six people destroyed the pipelines with explosives.

America’s Justice Department sued to block the $3.8bn purchase of Spirit Airlines, a no-frills carrier, by JetBlue Airways. Their tie-up would create the country’s fifth-largest airline and, trustbusters allege, raise prices for budget travellers. JetBlue has said it will defend the acquisition in court.

China agreed to facilitate Sri Lanka’s debt restructuring, removing a major obstacle to a $2.9bn IMF bail-out. Sri Lanka defaulted on its debt last year, becoming the first Asia-Pacific country to do so in some 20 years. But it has struggled to reach an agreement with its creditors to write-down its debts. China, a major global lender, has paralysed debt-forgiveness efforts in recent years.

America’s Federal Trade Commission has sought a broad swathe of Twitter’s internal communications, according to the Wall Street Journal. Regulators are reportedly concerned about whether the social-media firm will be able to honour an old settlement with the FTC to bolster users’ privacy, given how Mr Musk has aggressively sacked staff. Republican congressmen, meanwhile, accuse the agency of targeting Mr Musk for his political inclinations.

Kim Yo Jong, the influential sister of North Korea’s dictator Kim Jong Un, said her country would consider it a “declaration of war” if America shot down any of its missiles. North Korea has resumed testing intercontinental ballistic missiles in the Pacific. Last week America and South Korea announced that they would hold an 11-day military drill, starting on March 13th.

UEFA, European football’s governing body, said it will fully refund all fans of Liverpool, an English club, who had tickets for the 2022 Champions League final in Paris. Liverpool supporters struggled to enter the stadium and French police then sprayed them with tear gas, delaying the match by 36 minutes. An independent report said “it is remarkable no one lost their life”.

Fact of the day: $64m, the yearly sales of romance and saga fiction in Britain, according to Nielsen BookData, the highest level in a decade. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AFP
Australia’s prime minister visits India
On Wednesday Anthony Albanese, Australia’s prime minister, arrives in India for meetings with his counterpart Narendra Modi. The pair plan to take in a cricket match, part of a hard-fought series between their countries. But the rest of the agenda will be more conciliatory, as they address a common concern: China.

Australia needs new markets for exports clobbered by China’s trade restrictions. Last year it signed an interim free-trade deal with India, which it hopes will roughly double two-way trade to A$60bn ($40bn). Military ties are also deepening. Australia and India make up half of the Quad, a China-focused security group which also includes America and Japan, that has conducted regular joint naval exercises since 2020.

Talk of a “values-based” partnership with India has faded. Mr Albanese’s government dodges questions about sectarian violence and media crackdowns in India. But interests, rather than ideals, mean the two countries will be batting together.


PHOTO: TWITTER
A soldier’s execution grips Ukraine
Ukraine has provisionally identified a soldier seemingly executed in Russian captivity as 40-year-old Tymofii Shadura. Shocking footage released on Monday showed an unarmed soldier shot multiple times after uttering the words “Slava Ukraini” (“Glory to Ukraine”) to his captors. The soldier’s final words of resistance—an oft-repeated expression of Ukraine’s fighting spirit—have seen him hailed as a national hero.

Comrades from the 30th separate-mechanised brigade confirmed that Mr Shadura had been missing in action near Bakhmut, a town in eastern Ukraine, since February 3rd. Battles in Bakhmut have been particularly bloody in recent weeks, with mercenaries from Russia’s Wagner Group working alongside regular soldiers to close in on Ukrainian units remaining there. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, has vowed to hold the town, but its fall could be imminent. Russia’s victory would mainly be symbolic, with Ukrainian troops simply forming a new defensive line to the West.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Economist’s glass-ceiling index
“In this organisation, women’s median hourly pay is 52% lower than men’s”. Since 2021 “Gender Pay Gap Bot”, an automated Twitter account, has been cheerily posting the pay disparities of those firms that laud their female employees on International Women’s Day. This year’s outing, on Wednesday, will be no different.

Our “glass-ceiling index” is an annual ranking of working conditions for women in 29 wealthy countries, with measures including labour-force participation and child-care costs. The latest version shows that the median gender-wage gap across the OECD, a rich-country club, widened slightly to 12% in 2022, from 11.6% the year before. This is probably an economic hangover from the pandemic, which disproportionately affected working women. Hoping to spur change, Britain and the EU now require large companies to disclose their pay gaps. Japan and Australia will soon follow suit. Our findings were not all bad: for instance, women now make up over 30% of seats on corporate boards. Still, progress remains frustratingly slow.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Bankers in Switzerland on trial for helping Putin
The trial of four bankers accused of helping Vladimir Putin deposit millions of francs in Switzerland will start in Zurich on Wednesday. The foursome (all of whom deny wrongdoing) worked at Gazprombank, a Russian bank that announced the closure of its operations in Switzerland last October after it fell into the crosshairs of Swiss regulators. According to the indictment, the bankers failed to conduct proper due diligence on Sergey Roldugin, a cellist and close friend of Russia’s president, in 2014 when he opened two Gazprombank accounts on behalf of shell companies and deposited around $50m in them.

The suspicion is that the real owner of the assets, which seem on the large side for a humble cellist, might be Mr Putin. Mr Roldugin has other mysterious pots of money, too. The Panama papers, a vast collection of documents leaked in 2016, suggested that he had some $2bn stashed in offshore accounts. The case could provide a rare insight into the true scale of Mr Putin’s wealth.


PHOTO: EYEVINE
The Senate looks to overturn DC’s crime bill
On Wednesday the Senate is expected to scrap a crime bill passed by Washington, DC’s council. It would be the first time in three decades that Congress has rejected a local law in America’s capital. A vote to overturn the bill would undo revisions to the district’s criminal code that reduce maximum penalties for certain crimes, like carjackings and burglaries, and expand the right to a trial by jury for most misdemeanours. The House of Representatives already voted to scrap it, with 31 Democrats joining the Republican majority. On Monday, hoping to prevent a Senate vote, the council withdrew the bill. That may not work.

President Joe Biden has said that he would not veto Republican attempts to overturn the bill, should they pass the Senate. Democrats are dismayed, arguing that Congress’s meddling threatens the district’s future autonomy. But Mr Biden may be looking ahead to the presidential election in 2024—when a reputation for being soft on crime might not serve him well.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Wednesday: Which flamboyant British director made films such as “Women in Love” and “The Devils”?

Tuesday: Which syndicated cartoon strip features a small boy and his stuffed tiger?

State interference is an evil, where it cannot be shown to be a good.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
