The world in brief July 11, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 03:44 GMT+1 / 10:44 Hong Kong 

Protesters in Sri Lanka say they will occupy the presidential palace until the president, Gotabaya Rajapaska, actually resigns. Mr Rajapaska has said he will step down as president on July 13. Protesters demanding his resignation had set fire to the private home of the prime minister, Ranil Wickremesinghe, and earlier stormed the presidential palace. They are angry about the country’s financial crisis, rapid inflation, and shortages of food and fuel. Mr Wickremesinghe also agreed to resign.

Britain’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, joined the lengthening list of candidates to replace Boris Johnson as leader of the Conservative Party, and as prime minister. Ms Truss cut short her time at the G20 meeting in Bali after Mr Johnson announced that he would resign. She joins a growing coterie of candidates, including Sajid Javid and Jeremy Hunt, two former health secretaries, and Rishi Sunak, a former chancellor.

Steve Bannon, a former adviser to Donald Trump who helped propel him to the White House, agreed to testify before the committee investigating the January 6th attack on the Capitol. Mr Bannon was previously indicted for contempt of Congress for refusing to appear before the panel. He was not working in the White House when the mob descended on the Capitol building last year.

Exit polls in Japan for parliamentary elections, held two days after Abe Shinzo was assassinated, suggested that his Liberal Democratic Party would increase its majority in the upper house. After the former prime minister was killed, Kishida Fumio, Mr Abe’s successor, had pledged to continue with the vote lest the country “succumb to violence”. Police admitted that there had been “problems” in the security provided to Mr Abe.

Novak Djokovic of Serbia beat Nick Kyrgios, an Australian, in four sets to win the men’s singles title at the Wimbledon tennis championships. It was the fourth consecutive Wimbledon victory for Mr Djokovic and his seventh in total. On Saturday Elena Rybakina of Kazakhstan beat Ons Jabeur, a Tunisian, to win the women’s singles final.

Police in South Africa said at least 15 people were killed when gunmen opened fire on customers at a tavern in Soweto, an area near to Johannesburg. In the early hours of Sunday morning a group of men armed with rifles and pistols entered the bar and shot indiscriminately into the crowd.

Russian missiles and rockets struck several cities in the Donbas region in eastern Ukraine, causing widespread damage, according to officials. Serhiy Haidai, a regional governor, described the attacks as “true hell”. The Ukrainian government also asked residents in Russian-held territories in the south to evacuate as it prepares a counter-offensive. Earlier British military intelligence said that Russia is assembling reserve forces near the border of Ukraine.

Fact of the day: $4bn, TikTok’s revenue last year. That should rise to $12bn this year and $23bn in 2024. 

Jostling to be Britain’s new leader
For weeks the excuse made by Conservative MPs for their failure to remove Boris Johnson, the prime minister, from office was that there was no viable replacement. But since he stepped down as leader of the party last week, it turns out that quite a few think they could succeed him.

Mr Johnson wants to remain prime minister until his replacement as Tory party leader (and thus prime minister) has been decided. In ballots over the next fortnight Tory MPs will whittle down the candidates to two. The final pair will then be chosen by all Conservative Party members, by early September.

So far nine MPs have put themselves forward. They include a former chancellor Rishi Sunak, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and the attorney-general, Suella Braverman. The candidates are scrabbling over similar territory: slashing taxes, increasing defence spending—and distancing themselves from the sleaze and chaos of the Johnson era.

Power struggles in the Pacific

PHOTO: ALAMY
On the eve of the annual meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum, due to begin on Monday, the president of Kiribati said his government would not attend. Taneti Maamau said the forum had failed to address concerns of Micronesian countries. It is a blow to a diplomatic group whose 18 far-flung members are already at the centre of an intensifying contest for influence.

In April China signed a security pact with the Solomon Islands, letting it send in military personnel, police and ships, if invited. China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, has since tried—without success—to convince ten Pacific countries to sign a regional trade and security agreement. In response, America and its allies are increasing aid and diplomatic attention.

Pacific island nations are wary of being caught between big world powers. And they want more done throughout the world to address climate change. Given such challenges, the group needs all the solidarity it can muster.

Gazprom’s gas squeeze

PHOTO: DPA
When the German government suggested recently that a suspension of Russian gas exports to Europe could cause a global financial crisis, it seemed a tad alarmist. But that dark spectre is looming ever larger.

On Monday Gazprom, Russia’s state energy goliath, is due to shut down all flows along Nord Stream 1, the main conduit through which Russian gas reaches Europe. Ostensibly, this is for scheduled maintenance of a turbine, and gas exports are supposed to resume in around ten days. But there is another possibility—that Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, will find an excuse not to restart the flow of gas.

In June the volume of Russian gas exported via all the main pipelines to Europe was just 4.7bn cubic metres, down by two-fifths compared with May and barely a third the level of early 2021. Even if gas starts to flow again soon, Mr Putin might be waiting for colder weather to cut off exports at a moment of maximum leverage.


Cuba’s July 11th protests

PHOTO: AFP
A year ago thousands of Cubans took to the streets to protest against conditions on the island. Their readiness to express discontent—about electricity shortages, empty shops, and a failing economy—was unprecedented. So too was the government’s crackdown. The 700 demonstrators still waiting to be tried may face sentences of between five and 30 years.

Out of fear, the streets of Havana are likely to be quiet today. But social media is ringing with demands to free some of the more prominent prisoners, including artists Luis Manuel Otero Alcántara and Maykel Castillo Pérez. Marches and vigils to commemorate July 11th are being held in over 30 cities outside of Cuba, from Miami to Montevideo.

As economic conditions on the island have grown yet worse than before, ever more Cubans are fleeing. An influx of migrants to America has prompted President Joe Biden’s administration to relax some sanctions. But with few meaningful reforms at home, Cubans’ many grievances remain.

Football leagues in competition

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Last year European football was roiled by plans for a breakaway “Super League” which would have removed the best teams from the Champions League, the main existing club competition. Investors cheered. But fans revolted, broadcasters snubbed it and governments vowed to block the tournament. It fell apart within 48 hours.

On Monday the European Court of Justice will consider whether UEFA and FIFA, the governing bodies of European and world football, contravene EU competition law by claiming exclusive rights to host tournaments. The verdict will advise a separate tribunal in which three would-be Super League clubs, Barcelona, Juventus and Real Madrid, claim the rules unfairly restrict them from setting up a rival competition (which they are still keen to do).

The organisers of the Super League and UEFA have more in common than they would like to admit. Both sides want to maximise revenue by scheduling more matches between Europe’s biggest teams. And each tournament has tried to guarantee places for the richest clubs. For a supposedly meritocratic game, football has developed a strong protectionist streak.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Which 1950s singer, who was partially deaf, is mentioned in the lyrics of the song “Come on Eileen” by Dexy’s Midnight Runners?

Children are likely to live up to what you believe of them.

Lady Bird Johnson
