The world in brief
Setpember 21, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The Federal Reserve left its benchmark interest rate unchanged from its previous meeting in July. The range of 5.25% to 5.5% is the highest in 22 years. Rate-setters now think that there will be one more hike this year, and they expect to hold rates steady through next year to combat inflation.

Thousands of protestors flocked to Yerevan, the capital of Armenia, and called for the resignation of Nikol Pashinyan, the country’s prime minister, over his perceived surrender of Nagorno-Karabakh. Earlier a ceasefire took hold in the besieged enclave, one day after at least 32 people were reportedly killed in Azerbaijan’s offensive against Armenian separatists. According to the agreement, the region’s Armenian militia will disarm and disband.

In an address to the UN Security Council, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, criticised Russia’s permanent seat and veto. He also proposed a peace summit. It was the first time that Mr Zelensky had attended the council in person, and his first time sharing a table with senior Russian officials since Russia invaded Ukraine. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, is also expected to speak.

America’s Senate prepared on Wednesday to individually confirm three army generals to roles on a presidential advisory council, manoeuvring around a months-long obstruction by a Republican senator from Alabama. Tommy Tuberville has refused to allow votes on military appointments in batches—as is standard—over objections to the Pentagon’s abortion policy. The nominations of more than 300 officers have stalled as a result.

Rishi Sunak, Britain’s prime minister, announced that he would weaken several measures intended to decarbonise the country. The government will now delay a ban on buying new petrol and diesel cars by five years, to 2035. Households will now not be required, when switching their boilers, to replace them with heat pumps until 2035 either. Mr Sunak called his approach more “realistic”.

Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, met President Joe Biden on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly. It is the first time the pair have met since Mr Netanyahu returned to office last December. Earlier this year Mr Biden rebuked Mr Netanyahu over his efforts to undermine Israel’s supreme court and has since resisted inviting him back to the White House.

India urged its citizens to exercise caution when travelling to Canada, warning of “growing anti-India activities”. Relations between the two countries have soured since Canada accused Indian security services of orchestrating the shooting of Hardeep Singh Nijjar, a Canadian Sikh whom India considered a terrorist, in Vancouver in June. Mr Nijjar supported the establishment of a Sikh separatist state in northern India.

Figure of the day: $17bn, the value of South Korea’s arms sales in 2022, more than twice the amount of the previous year. Read the full story.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Is Asian trade bottoming out?
“Bellwether” is a word that is rarely used literally. It originally referred to a sheep with a bell around its neck, which both leads the flock and signals where it is going. South Korea, a leading supplier of semiconductors and other electronic components, is considered a bellwether for Asian trade. On Thursday it will release export numbers for the first 20 days of September, providing an early indication of how “Factory Asia” is faring.

Weak global demand and high inventories have hurt the region’s manufacturers over the past year. South Korea’s exports, for example, fell by 16.4% in dollar terms in the year to July. But August’s figures were better than expected, raising hopes that the trade cycle may be bottoming out. There were similar pleasant surprises in China and Taiwan. Unfortunately, South Korea’s trade figures for the first ten days of this month were less encouraging. The bell is ringing. But the flock’s direction is still unclear.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Zelensky in Washington
After a forceful performance at the UN General Assembly in New York, on Thursday the Volodymyr Zelensky show moves to Washington. Ukraine’s president will pursue two aims when he meets President Joe Biden and congressional leaders. First, to secure as much as possible from his wish-list of weapons (though Mr Biden remains reluctant to pledge the long-range ATACMS missiles Ukraine craves); second, to buttress support for copious aid in the future. Mr Biden’s request to Congress for another $24bn for Ukraine is stuck in the mire of budget politics.

When Mr Zelensky was last in Washington, in December, he received a two-minute standing ovation in Congress. But many Republicans, including the front-runner for their presidential nomination, Donald Trump, are wary of signing more large cheques for Ukraine. Mr Zelensky told The Economist this month that Mr Trump would “never” support Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. Yet with sluggish progress in Ukraine’s counter-offensive and a long attritional war in prospect, persuading Washington to stay the course is growing harder.



PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Republicans squabble over a shutdown
Kevin McCarthy, the Republican speaker of America’s House of Representatives, has a battle ahead as he tries to avoid a government shutdown—and to keep his job. Representatives have until September 30th to agree on the spending bills needed to prevent a shutdown. Mr McCarthy’s focus is on passing a stopgap bill with enough cash to keep things running while Congress finds common ground. On Sunday a group of Republicans, who have a 221-212 majority in the House, agreed to propose a month-long deal.

The House had been expected to vote on it on Thursday. But hardline Republicans, who see a shutdown as a way to drive through conservative policies, have refused to vote for it. More moderate Republicans could be forced to negotiate directly with Democrats in the Senate, where the Democrats hold a slim majority, to agree on legislation that could pass Congress with bipartisan support. If it comes to that, Mr McCarthy’s speakership would look very weak indeed.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The mystery of Turkish interest rates
Predicting Turkish interest-rate rises these days is a task fit for the country’s famed fortune tellers, who claim to spot premonitions in coffee grounds. Hardly anyone ever gets it right.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president, was convinced that high rates worsened inflation, and suppressed them for years. Then, in June—amid rocketing prices and a dire cost-of-living crisis—he changed tack and overhauled his economic team. Analysts predicted a dramatic increase in rates. But the central bank responded with a meek one, of 2.5 percentage points. A month later, when market-watchers moderated their expectations, the bank hiked rates by a whopping 7.5 percentage points.

The annual inflation rate in August was nearly 60%. That, combined with a weak Turkish lira, may presage another jump on Thursday. Reuters expect the central bank’s benchmark rate, now 25%, to be raised to 30%. Monetary policy is heading in the right direction, but there is no telling how fast.


PHOTO: DAVID PARRY / BOOKER PRIZE FOUND
The Booker Prize shortlist
On Thursday the organisers of the Booker Prize will whittle down a 13-book longlist of novels published in Britain and Ireland to a shortlist of six. These will compete for Anglophone literature’s most coveted honour—and a £50,000 ($62,000) prize—due to be announced on November 26th.

Fancied contenders to make the cut include “Western Lane”, Chetna Maroo’s debut about a squash prodigy; Martin MacInnes’s sci-fi epic “In Ascension”; Tan Twan Eng’s tale of fatal passion in colonial Malaya, “The House of Doors”; and Paul Lynch’s nightmarish Irish dystopia, “Prophet Song”.

Esi Edugyan, a Canadian novelist who chairs this year’s jury, has praised the “irreverence” and “iconoclasm” of the panel’s choices. Booker judges increasingly favour fresh voices over star names. Heavyweights passed over this year included Zadie Smith, Salman Rushdie and Anne Enright. “Old God’s Time”, a fifth nomination for Irish writer Sebastian Barry, made the longlist. But the old gods’ time may have passed.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Who wrote and directed the movies “Platoon” and “JFK”?

Wednesday: Which rock star had backing bands called “The Revolution” and the “New Power Generation”?

Human history becomes more and more a race between education and catastrophe.

H.G. Wells
