The world in brief
May 6, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO’s director-general, said that covid-19 is no longer a global health emergency, but would remain “a global health threat”. The virus was first given emergency status in January 2020, two months before it was declared a pandemic. It has officially killed over 6m people. Dr Tedros warned against complacency, and said that the virus is “still killing, and it is still changing”.

American employers added 253,000 jobs in April, exceeding forecasts. The unemployment rate dropped slightly to 3.4%, down from 3.5% in March. The uptick is contrary to earlier signs of a cooling economy. On Wednesday the Federal Reserve raised interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point, but indicated it may be reaching the end of its tightening regime—resilience in the labour market may complicate decision-making.

Yevgeny Prigozhin, the head of the Wagner mercenary group, threatened to withdraw his troops from Bakhmut by May 10th. The eastern Ukrainian town has been the site of intense fighting for more than ten months. In a scathing video Mr Prigozhin complained that Russian defence officials had failed to provide his troops with enough ammunition. Without more bullets, he said, “everything will crumble”.

Britain’s Conservative Party faced big losses in local elections as results trickled in. Labour and the Liberal Democrats won important seats in the north of England and the Midlands. Rishi Sunak, the prime minister, acknowledged the “disappointing results”. Sir Keir Starmer, the leader of the Labour party, said that his party is on track to win the next general election, expected in 2024.

Serbia’s president, Aleksandar Vucic, pledged to tighten gun-control laws after the second mass shooting in the country in just two days. On Thursday at least eight people were killed and 14 were injured in Mladenovac, a town south of Belgrade, the capital. A day earlier a 13-year-old shot dead eight fellow pupils and a security guard at a primary school in Belgrade.

Apple’s iPhone sales beat expectations and recovered from a slump, rising to $51.3bn in the first three months of 2023, a 2% increase over the previous quarter. The firm reported record sales in India, where it opened its first retail outlets last month. However the firm’s total revenues fell year on year for the second quarter in a row, dropping by 2.5%, to $94.8bn. The decline was driven largely by lower sales of Mac computers and iPads.

Football fans in Naples thronged the streets with flags and flares as the city’s club claimed the Italian league title, Serie A, for the first time in 33 years. Napoli had not won the league title since 1990, when Diego Maradona, an Argentine football legend, played for the team. Several fans were injured amid the raucous celebrations, according to local officials.

Word of the week: Yunarmia, “Youth Army” in Russian, and an organisation launched by Russia’s defence ministry in 2016, which teaches kids military skills at jolly summer camps. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Tradition reigns at Charles’s coronation
On Saturday Charles III will be formally crowned king in Westminster Abbey in London. The ceremony will be rich in history, tradition, kings, queens and people with improbable titles. Among those present in the abbey will be the Rouge Dragon Pursuivant; the Garter King of Arms; the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of this realm; and His Most Godly Beatitude Theophilos III, Patriarch of Jerusalem and All Palestine.

The ceremony itself is even more baroque. Charles will be anointed with oil using a special Coronation Spoon and sit on a chair inside which lies an ancient “Stone of Destiny”. Whether he will be enjoying his own destiny is unclear: he once said the realisation that he would be king dawned upon him “with the most ghastly inexorable sense”.

In one nod to modernity, however, members of the House of Lords may wear their “usual” parliamentary robes—which is to say, red robes lined with silk and trimmed with ermine—rather than fancier coronation ones. It’s almost street style.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Billionaires have had a bumpy ride
This year, according to the latest stocktake from Forbes, there are 2,640 dollar billionaires. Their collective wealth amounts to $12trn, or 12% of global GDP.

The Economist’s crony-capitalism index classifies the sources of their wealth into rent-seeking and non-rent-seeking sectors. Rent-seeking is common in sectors close to the state, including banking, construction, and natural resources. Rent-seekers sometimes gain favourable access to land, form cartels or lobby the government for advantageous regulations. Most billionaires do not operate in rent-seeking sectors. But we find that crony-sector wealth has increased from 1% of global GDP in 1998 to 3% today. Some two-thirds of that rise comes from four countries: America, China, India and Russia.

Yet plutocrats in all four countries—whether rent-seekers or not—have taken a hit recently. America’s tech founders have been pummelled by falling valuations. China has continued to shake down much of its capitalist class. And Russia’s plutocrats, many of them close to the Kremlin, have been hit by sanctions that have frozen their bank accounts, homes and yachts overseas.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Uffizi’s masterpieces travel beyond Florence
The “Madonna of the Baldacchino”, painted by Raphael in the early 16th century, has had an adventurous life. The painting travelled around Italy, and even to Paris, before settling in the Pitti Palace in Florence, part of the Uffizi galleries. Itinerant again, it will be unveiled on Saturday in the cathedral of the Tuscan town of Pescia, where it was housed for around 150 years until the late 17th century.

The temporary relocation of Raphael’s early masterpiece is part of a project to show works from the Uffizi's vast collection in places where they are particularly relevant. The galleries’ director, Eike Schmidt, calls his programme the “Uffizi Diffusi”, or “Scattered Uffizi”. It has held more than 30 exhibitions since 2021. Mr Schmidt is planning a second phase, in which works that would otherwise languish in the Uffizi’s storerooms will be exhibited permanently at newly restored sites around Tuscany. Visitors to Pescia can see the “Madonna of the Baldacchino” from next week to the end of July.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Sexual harassment in Indian sport
Over the past fortnight India’s best wrestlers, including Olympic medallists, have been training on the streets of Delhi. But this is no outdoor camp; it is an act of protest. The grapplers are hoping to pin down Brijbhushan Sharan Singh, the president of India’s national wrestling federation, whom they accuse of sexual harassment. Mr Singh, a member of India’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, denies all allegations, and accuses the protesters of playing a “political game”.

In January, when the claims first surfaced, the government promised an inquiry. But the wrestlers are demanding more—including Mr Singh’s arrest. (Delhi’s police have launched an investigation.) Support for the wrestlers’ cause is swelling, especially among fellow athletes. Indeed, sexual wrongdoing is a problem in other sports. And efforts to protect athletes are poorly enforced: 16 of India’s 30 sporting bodies do not have internal committees to deal with harassment issues, as the law requires.


PHOTO: RYAN LASH / TED
Weekend profile: Eliezer Yudkowsky, AI champion turned critic
“Shut it all down.” Eliezer Yudkowsky, a decision theorist and co-founder of the Machine Intelligence Research Institute in Berkeley, California, pulled no punches in a recent op-ed in Time magazine. For years Mr Yudkowsky, now 43, has warned, in relative obscurity, of the threat that a runaway artificial intelligence (AI) could pose to humankind. But since late last year, when services such as ChatGPT have become capable of giving human-like answers to all kinds of questions, many more have started to listen.

An autodidact, Mr Yudkowsky has a loyal following in the AI-research community. In his 20s, influenced by science-fiction writers such as Vernor Vinge, he yearned for a “singularity”—a superintelligence, to solve all human problems—and he put his many talents to creating it. But he realised that he was wrong: such a superintelligence was likely to develop a mind of its own, not aligned with the interests of humans. His goal became to further the development of a “friendly AI”, one that would not harm mankind.

Mr Yudkowsky does not mind being somewhat wrong. He started the blog “LessWrong”, which was once the main organ of the “rationalist” intellectual movement. Contemporary rationalists seek “to move our beliefs closer to reality”, as another leading light of the movement put it, in particular by making mistakes and using probability and logic to deal with uncertainty.

In the early 2000s Mr Yudkowsky was a prolific blogger, writing not just about the risk of AI, but about everything sci-fi-influenced geeks might be interested in, from cognitive biases and quantum physics to transhumanism and zombies. Today, the “Sequences”, as Mr Yudkowsky’s collected posts have come to be called, are required reading for rationalists. He has also published his ideas in a popular form, a fan-fiction novel called “Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality”.

Mr Yudkowsky’s critics say his approach is less rational than it is religious. Meta’s chief AI scientist recently called on him to stop his alarmism. Mr Yudkowsky retorted that it was “silly to claim that you’re not risking anyone’s life”.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Man getting a new hat made of recycled bits of gold, lace and copper—plus hare skin! (4,11)

1 across American state that is just like another, except without a Republican leader (6)

2 across Silver found in aspect of court (5)

3 across Walk out with saint, king and old president (6)

Factual clues

1 down Sovereign of 15 countries (4,7)

1 across City where a black teenager was shot this spring after ringing the wrong doorbell (6)

2 across Home of the body that issued an arrest warrant for Vladimir Putin (5)

3 across What Britain’s junior doctors conducted the longest-ever of last month (6)



This week’s quiz winners
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Apple Schubert, Munich, Germany

Holly Emerson, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, America

Anne O'Mahony, Skibbereen, Ireland

They gave the correct answers: Bob the Builder, ghosting, peer review, dolls and Public Enemy. The theme is Ibsen plays: The Master Builder, Ghosts, Peer Gynt, A Doll’s House and An Enemy of the People.

The questions:
Monday: Which children’s TV character was assisted by Lofty, Dizzy and Scoop?
Tuesday: What word can mean both “the appearance of double images on a TV screen” and “the sudden and unexplained ceasing of communication”?
Wednesday: What is the name for the process when academic papers are checked by independent experts in the field before publication?
Thursday: M3gan and Chucky, the subjects of horror movies, are what kind of creature?
Friday: Which hiphop group was founded by Chuck D and Flavor Flav in 1985?

Misfortune and creativity go together.

Cirilo F. Bautista
