The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (23:34 GMT+1 / 06:34 Hong Kong)

Mikhail Gorbachev, aged 91, died at hospital in Moscow, according to Russian news reports. As leader of the Soviet Union he launched a set of policies known as glasnost and perestroika, aimed at opening the economy and democratising politics. Mr Gorbachev cultivated warmer relations with the West and supported communist reformers in central and eastern Europe. He won the Nobel peace prize in 1990, and remained president of the Soviet Union until its collapse in 1991.

Ukraine claimed to have destroyed bridges across the Dnipro river and ammunition depots in its counter-offensive in the Russian-occupied region of Kherson. Meanwhile, UN inspectors arrived in Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, intending to visit the Zaporizhia nuclear plant, though Ukrainian officials accused Russia of trying to sabotage the mission. At a meeting in Prague, European Union defence ministers considered a proposal to train Ukrainian troops, which America, Britain and several EU countries are already doing.

The UN appealed for $160m in aid to help victims of Pakistan’s floods, which have now submerged a third of the country. The death toll has risen to more than 1,100 people. The planning minister estimated at least $10bn in damages and warned of food shortages. Separately the IMF approved a bail-out of $1.1bn to help Pakistan avoid defaulting on its debts.

The Chinese Communist Party’s leadership congress will start on October 16th, according to state media. Xi Jinping is likely to secure an unprecedented third term as party leader. The week-long event will review the country’s sweeping education and technology reforms, and will be closely watched for signals that China’s draconian zero-covid strategy has run its course.

Elon Musk argued in a court filing that allegations of lax security at Twitter, made recently by its former security chief, bolstered his case to withdraw his bid for the social-media firm. He also sought to delay the trial that will determine whether or not he must honour the acquisition agreement by about a month, to November.

In a joint statement Germany and France warned against banning Russian tourists from entering the EU, saying it could estrange future generations. Other European countries, such as the Czech Republic and Denmark, have advocated for such a step. EU ministers discussed the proposal on Tuesday.

Mississippi’s governor declared a state of emergency in the city of Jackson, after floods damaged the water-treatment system and left 180,000 people without potable water. Residents were told to drink bottled water “for an unknown period of time”. Jackson’s water crisis is not new: in 2020 America’s Environmental Protection Agency warned of lead pipes and other problems there.

Fact of the day: 64%, the percentage of American pharmacists struggling to get enough Adderall, a stimulant drug, according to a new survey. Read the full story.

Europe hits the gas on energy reform

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
“Preventive maintenance” of its pipelines is how Russia reminds Europeans of its energy chokehold on the continent. On Wednesday it will close down for three days Nord Stream 1, a pipeline that delivers natural gas from Russia to Germany and beyond. That will rattle Europeans, who are trying to refuel ahead of winter. Gas prices soared on the news last week.

The flow through Nord Stream 1 has already thinned, following ten days of maintenance in July. Russia says sanctions have made it difficult to source parts to keep it running properly; Germany denies that. Either way, expensive gas is pushing up energy tariffs across Europe, squeezing the finances of households and governments. That has prompted the EU to mull an emergency measure to decouple gas and electricity prices, though details remain scarce. A structural reform of the energy market is also brewing, as European leaders seek to move past Russia’s pipeline politics.


The UN faces its own deadline

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The departing UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, has promised to end her tenure on Wednesday with the release of a long-awaited report on Xinjiang. The western Chinese region, where the state appears to run a gulag for Uyghurs, a Muslim minority of 12m, is home to some of the world’s most glaring attacks on human rights. Yet the UN report has been three years in the works and its publication delayed for months. That is testimony to China’s leverage over the organisation. China issued a letter, signed by some 40 other countries, requesting the UN to bury the report. Last week Ms Bachelet revealed her office was under “tremendous pressure” over its publication.

The commissioner faces two tests. The first is whether she will meet her own publication deadline. The second is how harshly she will be willing to criticise China. Her heavily controlled visit to Xinjiang in May dampened hopes.

Feeling the heat of the COP27 summit

PHOTO: DPA
On Wednesday climate and environment ministers from the G20 countries—the world’s leading economies—will meet in Bali, Indonesia. They will be focused on COP27, a UN climate summit to be held in Egypt in November. At the previous summit in Glasgow last year world leaders acknowledged that their pledges to reduce carbon emissions were not nearly strong enough to meet the previously agreed goal of keeping global temperatures “well below” 2°C above pre-industrial levels. They vowed to do better.

But so far only two G20 countries have made good on that promise. Australia now plans to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions by 43% by 2030 (against 2005 levels), up from the previous figure of 26-28%. India, meanwhile, promises a cut of 45% over the same period, up from 33-35%, provided that it receives “international resources” to reach the goal. With less than ten weeks until COP27, expect a squabble in Bali over who should offer what, and—as ever—who should pay.

Tragedy foretold in Ethiopia’s war

PHOTO: EYEVINE
Both Ethiopia’s government and the rebels accuse the other of shooting first. A fragile truce which held up for five months in the country’s north has crumbled. Fierce fighting around the border between the Tigray and Amhara regions is spreading. Hopes for a peace deal between the federal government and the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) have been dashed.

Tigray has been under siege for more than a year. TPLF leaders warned they would restart the fight if Abiy Ahmed, Ethiopia’s prime minister, failed to release the hold. Abiy’s government refused talks appended by such “preconditions”. Two days after the ceasefire collapsed on August 24th, its forces struck Tigray’s capital, Mekele, killing at least four people including two children. The Tigrayans have since gathered momentum, advancing towards the Amhara town of Weldiya and threatening to seize it. That might just be a precursor to a strike westwards, to reclaim territory annexed by Amhara at the start of the war.

Venice makes up for lost time

PHOTO: PLANET PHOTOS
After two quiet years overshadowed by the pandemic, the world’s oldest film festival returns on Wednesday with an abundance of high-profile films from Oscar-winning directors. The 79th gala in Venice opens with “White Noise”, an adaptation of Don de Lillo’s novel, written and directed by Noah Baumbach, responsible for “Marriage Story” in 2019.

The following days will feature screenings of Andrew Dominik’s “Blonde”, based on Joyce Carol Oates’s fictionalised biography of Marilyn Monroe; “Bardo”, a Mexican semi-autobiographical comedy-drama from Alejandro Iñárritu (“The Revenant”); and “Bones and All”, a cannibal road movie starring Timothée Chalamet and directed by Luca Guadagnino (“Call Me By Your Name”). That line-up of the festival’s favourite male directors will be supplemented by Olivia Wilde. She is making her Venice debut with a 1950s-set mystery, “Don’t Worry Darling”, featuring her pop-singer boyfriend, Harry Styles. Cinema-starved fans and paparazzi alike will be in for a feast.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Katanas and daos are Asian versions of which type of weapon?

Tuesday: Which American state contains both Bryce Canyon and Zion national parks?

Genius is nothing more nor less than childhood recovered at will.

