The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 4, 2023

Kevin McCarthy lost three successive votes to become Speaker of America’s House of Representatives, after 20 far-right Republicans withheld their support. It marks the first time in a century that the lower chamber of Congress failed to elect a leader in a single poll. The rebels have coalesced behind Jim Jordan, though he lacks the support of the rest of the caucus. With their narrow majority, any Republican would need all but four of his party’s votes. Voting is to resume on Wednesday and will continue until a Speaker is chosen.

America’s Food and Drug Administration will allow American chemists to stock “abortion pills”, even as access to the actual procedure is curtailed by the Supreme Court’s repudiation of Roe v Wade. Mifepristone, a drug used to induce abortions, had previously been available through clinics; now the federal government will allow any customer with a prescription to buy it. Roughly half of the state governments, however, ban it entirely.

Russia blamed a Ukrainian missile attack that killed 89 Russian troops on January 1st on its own soldiers’ using mobile phones. The defence ministry said the “mass use” of personal mobiles, which is banned, helped Ukrainian forces locate the troops in Makiivka, a Russian-occupied town in the Donbas region. It had earlier admitted that 63 soldiers were killed in the strike; Ukraine has put the figure at about 400.

Colombia’s largest remaining guerilla group denied agreeing to a six-month ceasefire announced on Saturday by Gustavo Petro, the country’s president. Mr Petro, who has prioritised achieving “total peace”, had claimed to have reached a truce with Colombia’s five major rebel groups. But the National Liberation Army (ELN) countered that it had not been consulted—and “therefore no such agreement exists”.

Itamar Ben-Gvir, Israel’s new far-right national security minister, sparked Palestinian outrage as he visited the compound containing the al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem. Sacred to both Muslims and Jews, the holy site is run by a Jordanian-led Islamic council. Jews may enter the compound, but Jewish prayer is not permitted—a measure Mr Ben-Gvir previously threatened to overturn. The Palestinian foreign ministry called his visit an “unprecedented provocation”.

Twitter said it would expand the types of political advertising permitted on its platform, reversing a ban on all such ads implemented in 2019. The firm also said it would relax its policy towards “cause-based ads”. The changes are the latest in a series of shake-ups introduced by Elon Musk, who has mostly spooked advertisers since buying Twitter in October.

Sam Bankman-Fried pled not guilty to eight criminal charges, including wire fraud and money laundering, in a federal court in New York. Prosecutors allege that Mr Bankman-Fried, who presided over the collapse of FTX, a cryptocurrency exchange, illegally diverted customer funds to his trading firm. He is out of jail and confined to his parents’ home in California under the terms of his $250m bail agreement.

Fact of the day: 1,016, the number of days China will have spent closed to the world by the time its borders open on January 8th. Read the full story.

America’s economy loses its mojo

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The world’s biggest economy may be limping into the new year. A survey of America’s manufacturing sector, due out on Wednesday, is expected to reveal that in December it contracted for a second consecutive month. If so, it will add to evidence that the economy is on the cusp of a recession as the Federal Reserve’s aggressive tightening of monetary policy makes its impact felt.

A crucial question is how the Fed will respond to the slowdown. Minutes from the Fed’s December meeting, when it last raised interest rates, will be released on Wednesday, too. Analysts will pore over the month-old details to glean hints about the central bank’s thinking. The new data and minutes, though, will pale in importance compared with a jobs report on Friday. So long as America’s labour market remains robust, the Fed is likely to persist with raising rates. It worries that wage pressures will keep inflation high, even as the economy sputters.

What Ukraine’s bullseye says about the war

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Ukraine rang in the new year as Russian cruise missiles rained down on Kyiv. Hours later the country had its revenge. Using American-supplied HIMARS rocket-launchers, it destroyed a temporary barracks in a school in Makviika, in eastern Donetsk province. Russia’s defence ministry has said that 89 soldiers were killed. Ukraine and some Russian commentators say the true figure is in the hundreds.

The strike sparked fury in Russia with its military leadership. “Our generals are untrainable,” thundered Igor Girkin, who led Russia’s first invasion of Donbas in 2014. The attack shows how Russian forces still make elementary mistakes: Ukraine is thought to have picked up the mobile-phone signals of the Russian troops in the school. It also illustrates the vital role of attrition in the war, as Ukraine uses long-range precision weapons to wear down Russian forces—much as it did before offensives in Kherson and Kharkiv last year. Thinner Russian lines could pave the way for another Ukrainian advance.

The rising price of a baguette

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Thanks to generous government subsidies and a low dependency on Russian gas, France has been relatively well protected from Europe’s soaring inflation. In the year to November 2022 the French inflation rate, at 7.1%, was the second-lowest in the euro zone, after Spain’s. But even France is bracing for a rise in prices when figures are published on Wednesday. The Bank of France expects the country’s inflation rate to peak in the first half of 2023.

This comes at a tricky time for President Emmanuel Macron’s government. It has just ended petrol subsidies at the pump, and raised the cap on increases to electricity and gas bills to 15%. Support will be limited to small firms, such as the corner boulangerie. Higher costs of living will be keenly felt by many families, just as the government is controversially planning to raise the retirement age. France, no stranger to bread riots, could be in for a turbulent year.


Myanmar’s sour toast to independence

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
At precisely 4.20 on Wednesday morning a four-hour military parade kicks off in Naypyidaw, the capital of Myanmar. In 1948, this was the time deemed most auspicious by astrologers for the country, then known as Burma, to declare independence from British imperial rule. Seventy-five years on, the generals now in charge will oversee a gala of concerts and sporting tournaments, as well as a show of fireworks and drones.

But few citizens will share in the revelry. Many feel shackled anew since the army seized power in a coup nearly two years ago, destroying the country’s brief experiment in democratisation. Suppression of dissent has spiralled into an all-out civil war; armed opposition groups claim to control almost half the country. And the conflict has reverberated far beyond Myanmar’s borders. South-East Asia’s criminals find safety in the military-governed hinterland, and hundreds of thousands of people have been forced to flee their homes. A general election, due by August, is expected only to mock democracy further.

Netflix and shill: Madoff on film

PHOTO: NETFLIX
Fourteen years after his arrest, and almost two years after his death in prison, Bernie Madoff is getting the Netflix treatment. “Madoff: The Monster of Wall Street”, a four-part docuseries about the mega-swindler, is released on Wednesday.

Madoff’s Ponzi-scheming has already inspired a welter of books, plays and television dramas, as well as a documentary about his secretary. Is there anything left to tell? Netflix insists there is. It promises “unique access to whistleblowers, employees, investigators and victims”, as well as “never-before-seen video depositions of Madoff himself”.

There are unlikely to be startling revelations. Nevertheless, the story of New York’s dodgiest investor continues to resonate, and in one important sense is not over: a liquidator is still recovering and distributing funds to bilked investors. More than $14bn has been handed back so far, with more expected in 2023. For many who lost money, the anguish and suspense continue.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which area of Los Angeles was stricken by violent riots in August 1965?

Tuesday: Which novel by W. Somerset Maugham is based, in part, on the life of Paul Gauguin?

Without beauty, love, or danger it would be almost easy to live.

Albert Camus
