The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (00:17 GMT+1 / 07:17 Hong Kong)

The UN said China’s detention of Uyghurs in Xinjiang may “constitute international crimes, in particular crimes against humanity”. The findings came in a long-delayed report by the UN’s outgoing human-rights chief, Michelle Bachelet. Its release, fiercely resisted by China, came minutes before her term ended. China has detained more than 1m Uyghurs, a Muslim minority, in prison camps under the guise of counter-terrorism.

America’s Department of Justice said efforts were “likely taken” to obstruct its investigation into the handling of classified documents by Donald Trump at his Florida estate. In a court filing it said that documents were “likely concealed” from investigators, after a subpoena had been issued to the former president and his lawyers had attested that all sensitive material had been handed over.

Greenhouse-gas concentrations and sea levels reached record highs last year, according to America’s national weather forecaster. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said 2021 was among the six warmest years on record. The global average sea level rose for the tenth consecutive year and was 9.7cm higher than in 1993, when satellite measurements started.

Snap said it would lay off a fifth of its 6,400 staff and cancel various projects in an effort to cut costs. Evan Spiegel, the social-media firm’s boss, said year-over-year revenue growth was 8% so far in the current quarter—“well below” forecasts made at the start of the year. Snap’s share price, which is down by nearly 80% since January, perked up on the news.

The European Union voted not to impose a blanket ban on visas for Russians. Some member states, such as the Czech Republic and Denmark, had been pressing for such a measure, but others opposed it—Germany and France warned it could alienate future generations of Russians. EU ministers voted instead to suspend a visa facilitation agreement with Russia, which had made visa issuance easier.

Taiwan warned on Wednesday it would “counter-attack” Chinese forces that entered its territory and refused to leave. China has increased its military drills around Taiwan following the recent visit of Nancy Pelosi, the Speaker of America’s House of Representatives. On Tuesday the self-governing island, which Beijing claims as its own, fired warning shots at a Chinese drone for the first time.

The average life expectancy of Americans fell from 79 to 76 between 2019 and 2021, the largest two-year decline in nearly a century. The drop was caused primarily by the covid-19 pandemic. Native Americans and Alaska Natives saw particularly high reductions—in 2021 a newborn could on average expect to live to 65, down from around 71 in 2019.

Fact of the day: $465m, the rumoured pricetag of “The Rings of Power”, a new drama based on the “Lord of the Rings” books. Read the full story.

Russia rallies its troops for war games

PHOTO: REUTERS
Russian troops are in short supply, with the Kremlin struggling to find sufficient men to send into harm’s way in Ukraine. But that has not stopped the Russian army from scraping together enough soldiers for a week-long joint exercise. The quadrennial Vostok (East) war games, in Russia’s eastern military district, which includes Siberia, begins on Thursday. It will supposedly include 50,000 military personnel, 140 aircraft and 60 ships, though Russia has been known to exaggerate these figures.

The involvement of China and a dozen other countries, including India, is a gratifying sign of diplomatic solidarity for the Kremlin. Russia’s Pacific Fleet will conduct drills with China’s People’s Liberation Army Navy in the Sea of Japan, building on their first ever joint patrol in October. But China is more circumspect where it counts: Russia’s requests for arms and ammunition to be deployed in Ukraine have come to naught.

An EU embassy in Silicon Valley

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
On Thursday the European Commission, the executive branch of the European Union, opens its first office in San Francisco—a diplomatic mission of sorts to work with Silicon Valley’s firms. It is a timely move, as the EU prepares to enforce the Digital Markets Act and Digital Services Act, two ambitious new laws for the internet approved by the European Parliament in July. Gerard de Graaf, a senior Eurocrat who oversaw the drafting of the legislation, will head the San Francisco office.

Whether he will be treated as the EU’s plenipotentiary is another question. Firms like Alphabet, Apple and Meta (née Facebook) may prefer to deal directly with Brussels, where each employs hordes of lobbyists. At any rate, the new office formalises what has been a reality for some time. In many ways, tech titans are much like big virtual nations and need to be dealt with as such. That includes maintaining diplomatic relations.

Bar fight in India

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Delhi’s muggy monsoon season leaves many craving a drink, but finding one in India’s capital has become difficult. For the past month most of its privately run booze stores have been shut as national officials pursue a corruption probe into the city’s new alcohol policy. On Thursday sales are due to resume, but only in government-run shops. That will be a relief for tipplers, but a disappointment for the Aam Aadmi Party, which runs Delhi’s city government and is emerging as a significant opposition force to the Bharatiya Janata Party, India’s ruling party.

The AAP had hoped that allowing private stores to sell alcohol and introducing a new excise policy would clean up the businesses and yield more in tax. But the BJP accused AAP leaders of benefiting personally from privatisation, prompting a U-turn. The AAP is taking the fight outside. Arvind Kejriwal, the party’s leader, has accused the BJP of corruption and promoting “spurious” (ie, lethal, illegal) liquor in Gujarat, a western state where booze is banned—and elections are due in December.

Meta closes its crypto wallet

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Facebook’s parent company, Meta, is giving up on its cryptocurrency business. Things were already looking bumpy in January, when Diem, a much-scrutinised cryptocurrency backed by Facebook and formerly known as Libra, sold its assets for $182m. On Thursday Novi, Facebook’s cryptocurrency wallet, will be folded away less than a year after its launch. That is because the once-lucrative coins lost their shine after a severe crypto market downturn this summer.

Also, Meta’s profits from its money-spinning advertising business are slipping as its user base stagnates and competition from TikTok stiffens. Facebook is thus re-focusing on the hype of the metaverse (hence its new company name). Novi is not the only initiative affected. Next month, the American company will close its standalone gaming app, which failed to take on Twitch, Amazon’s video game-streaming giant. Until Meta can revive its ads business or make money from the metaverse, other side projects will be at risk of the chop too.

Australia needs its migrants back

PHOTO: PRESS ASSOCIATION
Australia depends on immigrants more than most rich countries: almost one-third of its population of 26m was born overseas. But it now needs more, after an estimated 600,000 immigrants who would have moved to Australia were kept out by pandemic lockdowns, according to CEDA, an economic think-tank. Australia reopened its borders in February, but unemployment stands at just 3.4% and companies are struggling to find staff. On Thursday the Labor government, which took office in May, meets unions and business lobbies to discuss the tight labour market.

The prime minister, Anthony Albanese, may boost the annual quota for permanent migrants from 160,000 to 200,000. Such moves are uncontroversial down under, where work visas are carefully distributed under a points-based system that balances openness with selectivity. But a visa-processing backlog means that immigrants will not return as quickly as Australia would like. It will be at least 2024 before the numbers are back.


Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: The annual general meeting of Berkshire Hathaway, Warren Buffett’s company, is held in which US city?

Wednesday: Katanas and daos are Asian versions of which type of weapon?

Reading is to the mind what exercise is to the body.

Sir Richard Steele
