The world in brief December 8, 2022

Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (22:52 GMT / 06:52 Hong Kong)

Lawmakers in Peru voted 101-6 to oust Pedro Castillo as president shortly after he tried to dissolve Congress. He was detained by police and replaced by his vice-president, Dina Boluarte. Earlier, in an attempt to evade impeachment, Mr Castillo had said he would disband the legislature and rule by emergency decree. An inept leftist, he cycled through more than 70 ministers in his government and figures in five criminal probes.

German police arrested 25 alleged members and supporters of a far-right terrorist group on suspicion of plotting to overthrow the country’s government. The group, which included one active soldier and several reservists, planned to storm the German parliament and seize power in a violent coup, according to the prosecutor’s office. Police carried out 130 related searches across Germany on Wednesday morning.

The Taliban staged the first public execution, in a crowded sports stadium in the south-west of Afghanistan, since taking power last year. A father shot the man convicted of murdering his son. The government’s spokesman said the decision to carry out the punishment had been made “very carefully”. America said it marked a “return to their regressive and abusive practices of the 1990s”.

Saudi Arabia logged a budget surplus of $27bn, or 2.6% of GDP, in 2022 as it benefited from elevated oil prices. Preliminary figures suggest the kingdom’s economy will grow by 8.5% this year, said the finance ministry, beating the IMF’s prediction by about one percentage point. By contrast global GDP is forecast to expand by 3.2% in 2022.

Russian forces killed at least 441 civilians during the early weeks of the war in Ukraine and may have committed war crimes, said the UN’s human rights office, though the civilian death toll is probably much higher. The organisation gathered evidence from 102 towns and villages near the capital, Kyiv, and in the northern regions of Chernihiv and Sumy between February 24th and early April.

Britain approved its first coal mine in 30 years. The proposed site, in north-west England, will produce coking coal for use in steelmaking. The project’s backers say there is domestic demand for the stuff, but the two firms making steel with coal in England have plans to adopt cleaner methods. Earlier the government’s climate-change adviser called the plan “absolutely indefensible”.

India’s central bank raised its key interest rate by 35 basis points to 6.25% in a further bid to restrain inflation; it is the fifth such hike since May. Retail inflation is currently running at almost 7%, well above the bank’s target. The bank also lowered the country’s growth forecast for this financial year from 7% to 6.8%.

Fact of the day: $2,000, the price per kg of fine white Darjeeling tea, known as the “champagne of teas”. Read the full story.

A cloudy forecast for Japan’s economy

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The world’s third-largest economy is not doing well. Japan’s GDP shrank by an annualised 1.2% in the third quarter of 2022, according to an estimate released last month. A revision due on Thursday is expected to provide little cheer. Economists had predicted an expansion in the third quarter, but a surge in coronavirus infections over the summer and higher inflation, caused partly by a decline in the value of the yen, took a toll on the economy.

But there may be sunshine ahead. A government stimulus package should soon make a difference, and the lifting of covid-related travel curbs is expected to bring back tourists. It remains to be seen, however, if that will be enough to offset other problems, including tumbling real wages and depressed business confidence. Even if domestic demand recovers, Japan’s economy will be hurt by a global recession.

Disney tries to make streaming pay

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
By one measure Disney is a big success in streaming. In just three years its Disney+ service has signed up 164m members. The company has 236m active subscriptions to Disney+ and its other streaming platforms, Hulu and ESPN+. That is even more than Netflix, until recently the market leader.

The only snag is that the business bleeds money. Last quarter Disney lost $1.5bn on streaming, more than twice as much as in the same quarter last year. That hastened the sacking of its chief executive, Bob Chapek, on November 20th.

On Thursday Disney will put into practice its new plan for restoring profitability. Disney+ in America will be punctuated by advertising for the first time. Viewers will have to pay $10.99 a month, 38% more than the current ad-free subscription price, to avoid ads. They may moan, but with Netflix launching ads last month there is no escape: streamers are determined to make the business pay.


Wirecard’s former bosses go on trial

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Two-and-a-half years ago Wirecard collapsed into bankruptcy after admitting that the €1.9bn ($2bn) the company was meant to have stored away in offshore escrow accounts “probably” did “not exist”. On Thursday Markus Braun, the payment-processing firm’s Austrian former chief executive, and two other leaders will begin to stand trial at a court in Munich. Several key suspects will not be present. Jan Marsalek, the firm’s COO, is on the run.

The trial for fraud at a company once seen as a star of Germany’s tech sector is expected to last more than a year. After an investigation that lasted more than 20 months, prosecutors allege that Mr Braun and his accomplices stole more than €255m of Wirecard funds, mainly through fake loans, and doctored accounts to dupe banks and other creditors. (He has denied any knowledge of manipulated accounts.) They are charged with fraud, accounting irregularities and embezzlement on a large scale. Just reading out all the charges will take around five hours.

Times of trouble for the news

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Sixty years ago on Thursday, hundreds of printers stopped operating their machines at the New York Times and went on strike. The number of strikers eventually swelled to 17,000, including reporters, photoengravers and elevator operators from seven daily papers in New York. The walkout lasted 114 days and killed four papers.

On Thursday a similar coalition of 1,100 Times employees plans to walk off the job at midnight. The strikers hope a 24-hour stoppage will secure them higher wages. It comes at a difficult time for American media organisations, many of which are shedding staff in anticipation of an economic downturn—though the Times continues to report substantial profits.

The Times, which has more paying digital subscribers than any other English-language paper in the world, has not sought a deal to avert the strike. The strikers will not slay the Gray Lady, but could fire up other disgruntled workers in the troubled industry.

Harry and Meghan take on the firm, again

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Life in Britain’s royal family is a “dirty game”, says Prince Harry. But it seems that he and his wife, Meghan Markle, cannot help but play it. On Thursday more accusations are expected with the release of “Harry & Meghan”, a Netflix documentary series.

In the six-episode series, the couple raise the stakes of their public-relations war with Britain’s royal family, accusing the palace of leaking and planting stories in the media. They also allege that the firm mistreated Ms Markle because of her race. The trailer has already caused a furore, with some alleging that it portrays the couple as being more harangued by the paparazzi than they actually were.

Still, the couple hope to win hearts and minds. That quest will be helped by a recent controversy about Prince William’s godmother, who resigned from royal duties after news that she had repeatedly asked a black British guest where she was “really” from.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which set of Roman biographies was written by Suetonius?

Wednesday: Which modern Egyptian city is on the site of the ancient capital of Thebes?

Music begins where the possibilities of language end

Jean Sibelius
