The world in brief
April 15, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

A Boston court charged Jack Teixeira, the man suspected of leaking hundreds of intelligence files, with the unauthorised removal and transmission of classified documents and materials. According to papers filed by the American government, Mr Teixeira’s work for the intelligence wing of the Massachusetts Air National Guard meant he had held top security clearance since 2021. On Thursday the FBI arrested Mr Teixeira, who allegedly ran the server on Discord, a messaging platform, where the classified documents were leaked.

France’s Constitutional Council validated pension reforms that were pushed through parliament by President Emmanuel Macron, sweeping away the final obstacle to their implementation. Mr Macron’s plan to raise the retirement age from 62 to 64 has triggered huge protests throughout the country. The court’s decision is unlikely to put an immediate end to those, or to the political crisis that ensued.

America’s Supreme Court temporarily blocked restrictions placed on mifepristone, a pill used for abortions. The hold expires on Wednesday. A lower court had earlier ruled that the drug could stay on the shelves, but in effect reintroduced some more onerous rules about how it can be obtained. Mifepristone has been at the centre of a complex legal battle, which began when federal judges in Texas and Washington state issued conflicting rulings over the drug’s approval last week.

In a meeting with her Chinese counterpart, Germany’s foreign minister said conflict over Taiwan could “only be solved peacefully”. Annalena Baerbock is visiting China days after Emmanuel Macron held a widely criticised press interview at the conclusion of his trip to the country. Referring to Taiwan, Mr Macron argued that Europe should not get “caught up in crises that are not ours”.

A prisoner swap began in Yemen between pro-Saudi forces and Iran-backed Houthi rebels; more than 700 Houthis will be released in exchange for about 180 Saudi coalition troops. A Chinese-brokered rapprochement between Iran and Saudi Arabia has bolstered efforts by the kingdom to end its involvement in the nearly decade-long civil war. On Thursday Saudi and Houthi diplomats failed to agree a truce, but committed to further negotiations.

The International Energy Agency said Russian oil exports rose to 8.1m barrels per day in March, the highest level for nearly three years, despite Western sanctions on crude. However, while the country’s oil revenues recovered by $1bn last month to $12.7bn, they remain 43% lower compared with a year earlier. In the same month India overtook China as the largest importer of Russian oil in Asia.

The Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer blasted off from French Guiana, beginning an eight-year journey to the gas-giant planet in search of water. The spaceship, run by the European Space Agency, was meant to take off on Thursday but was delayed because of bad weather. It will use photography, radar and magnetic readings to investigate Jupiter’s icy moons for water, and thus the possibility of life.

Word of the week: minilateralism, the use of alliances by non-aligned countries for particular ends, rather than joining a bloc (as opposed to multilateralism). Read the full story.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
China’s rebounding property market
Last year China’s vast housing market was caught in a vicious circle. Tight borrowing limits and weak sales left over-indebted property developers with too little cash to finish building homes they had sold in advance. These construction delays then put off prospective homebuyers, further weakening sales.

But the sector seems on the brink of a remarkable recovery. Sales rose by 44% year-on-year in March in 30 big cities. New figures out on April 18th will reveal whether that turnaround is spreading to the rest of the country. The government has relieved pressure on property developers’ financing and increased pressure on them to finish building pre-sold homes. Households now seem more confident that purchased properties will actually be delivered. They also seem more confident that house prices will increase, according to a recent survey by the central bank. Property-price figures for March, which will be released on Saturday, will show if they are right.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
Germany’s nuclear nighty-night
The lights will go out at Germany’s last three nuclear power plants on Saturday. When a deadline to close them was set in 2011, following a deadly nuclear blow-out at Fukushima in Japan, most Germans expected to be cheering the demise of a “dangerous and dirty” industry. But war in Ukraine has yanked up energy prices, throttled natural gas supplies and forced Germany back to using far filthier coal. Polls show that 68% of Germans now want nuclear plants to stay open. So why is Germany bucking the global trend of reappraising nuclear energy as a good thing?

The answer is coalition politics. It may look daft to scrap 6% of your power capacity—which is what the three plants still provide, down from 31% when Germany’s nuclear industry peaked in the 1990s. But nuclear exit is a trigger issue for the Greens. If the two parties with which they share power touch that, Germany’s government might melt down.


PHOTO: EMAHOY TSEGE MARIAM MUSIC FOUNDA
An Ethiopian nun’s divine music
The 1960s and 1970s were a golden age for Ethiopian music. Among the musicians of “Swinging Addis”, as the capital became known, was a prolific pianist called Emahoy Tsegue-Maryam Guebrou, who was also a nun in the Ethiopian Orthodox Church. This month, Mississippi Records is reissuing two of her albums, recorded during the 1960s, in addition to a new LP called “Jerusalem”. It features three tracks that the nun wrote around 1970 and several from the 1980s, which were only recently discovered.

Ms Guebrou’s uplifting compositions blend Western classical traditions with jazz and Ethiopia’s holy music. The songs feel at once ancient and modern, and in many ways reflect her extraordinary life. Born in 1923, she studied piano in Switzerland as a girl, and was later imprisoned during Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia in 1935. Afterwards, she joined a monastery and eventually moved to Jerusalem in 1984. Ms Guebrou died in March, at the age of 99, but in each meandering piano solo, her spirit lives on.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A strikingly open playoffs
This year’s NBA playoffs are anyone’s to win. The post-season tournament begins on Saturday, with the Philadelphia 76ers tipping off against the Brooklyn Nets and the Boston Celtics playing the Atlanta Hawks. Pundits judged this season to be unusually open before it began: the tipsters at FiveThirtyEight, a data-journalism site, gave 11 teams at least a 5% chance of winning the title, the most since they started forecasting eight years ago. For the first time in more than two decades, no team managed to win 60 of their 82 regular-season games.

This may be because the top players are more evenly dispersed. There is not a single side this year who can put up three superstars, as did the Golden State Warriors when Steph Curry, Kevin Durant and Draymond Green were in their prime. The 20 players rated most highly by FiveThirtyEight represent 14 different teams. This increased parity will make for an unpredictable nine weeks.


Weekend profile: the two men at the heart of Yemen’s peace talks
It is not the end, but perhaps the beginning of the end. On April 9th a delegation from Saudi Arabia flew to Sana’a, the capital of Yemen, to meet representatives of the Houthis, a Shia militia that controls much of the country. At the Yemeni president’s request, a Saudi-led coalition stepped in to help topple the Houthis. They have been at war for eight years.

At the centre of this month’s talks were two men who probably never expected to be. The first, Muhammad Ali al-Houthi (pictured), is a senior figure in the militia that bears his family name. A forty-something cousin of the group’s leader, he has said the Saudis are a satrap of America and a stalking-horse for Israel. He has been a target of coalition airstrikes; one reportedly wounded him in 2015. He is third on Saudi Arabia’s most-wanted list in Yemen, with a $20m bounty on his head.

Yet there he was, shaking hands with an emissary of the enemy: Muhammad al-Jaber, the Saudi envoy to Yemen since 2014. Little is known about Mr al-Jabar, but well-connected Saudis describe him as a fearsome member of the Mukhabarat, or intelligence service.

The meeting of these two men is a mark of how dismal conditions have become in Yemen. The war has created the world’s worst humanitarian crisis: more than 200,000 people have died, and two-thirds of the population need foreign aid to survive. But it has not dislodged the Houthis from power. The Saudi-backed “legitimate government” of Yemen has been feckless and prone to infighting. The Houthis, backed by Iran, have lobbed thousands of rockets and drones across the border into Saudi Arabia.

After eight years of failure, the Saudis want out. Months of negotiations were given a boost by last month’s unexpected rapprochement between Saudi Arabia and Iran. On Friday the Saudis and Houthis began to exchange nearly 900 prisoners, the biggest such swap in two and a half years. Next may come a permanent ceasefire, extending the temporary truce that was agreed in April 2022. The truce is unlikely to end Yemen’s civil war, which predates Saudi involvement. But it should herald more uncomfortable meetings between two longtime foes.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Disorganised graph-creator or map-maker (12)

1 across Racketeers hiding art in half of cellar (6)

2 across Trousers picked up and handed down (5)

3 across Overhaul religious education for final term (6)

Factual clues

1 down One of those to whom today’s walkers owe a great deal (12)

1 across What OPEC is for oil (6)

2 across Something linked to traits and diseases (5)

3 across Oregon has struggled to achieve this around drugs (6)



The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Ann Woodyard, Overland Park, Kansas, America

Paul de Wouters, Basel, Switzerland

Caio Priszculnik, São Paulo, Brazil

This week’s questions were:

Monday: Aristotle founded his school of philosophy in which Athenian temple?

Tuesday: Which river, with a source in the Adirondack mountains, flows into New York’s harbour?

Wednesday: What style of poetry, which often expresses personal feelings, encompasses elegies, odes and sonnets?

Thursday: Who composed the opera “Porgy and Bess”?

Friday: Who assassinated Abraham Lincoln?

They all gave the correct answers of Lyceum, Hudson, Lyric, George Gershwin and John Wilkes Booth. The theme is Broadway theatres: Lyceum, Hudson, Lyric, Gershwin and Booth.

One man is as good as another until he has written a book.

Benjamin Jowett
