The world in brief
July 13, 2023

Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The G7, a club of rich democracies, announced new security guarantees for Ukraine at a meeting of NATO leaders in Vilnius, Lithuania. They will provide weapons and training to Ukraine’s armed forces over the coming years, and share intelligence. A Kremlin spokesperson denounced the agreement, saying it undermined Russian security. On Tuesday NATO leaders rebuffed President Volodymyr Zelensky’s calls for a timetable for Ukraine to join the alliance, saying his country could not become a member until “allies agree and conditions are met”.

America’s rate of inflation fell to an annual increase of 3% in June, down one percentage point compared with a month earlier; economists had predicted a figure of 3.1%. Core inflation, which excludes food and fuel costs, slowed to 4.8%; in June it was 5.3%. The Federal Reserve is still expected to resume raising interest rates, after a pause in June, later this month.

Thailand’s electoral commission recommended that Pita Limjaroenrat, the leader of the country’s pro-democracy party Move Forward, be barred from holding public office. He is due to contest a parliamentary vote on Thursday to elect a new prime minister, and may still do so. Meanwhile Prayuth Chan-ocha, the former general who has ruled Thailand since he seized power from an elected government in 2014, announced his retirement.

Disney extended the contract of its boss, Bob Iger, by two years, to 2026. After a short-lived retirement he returned to the helm last November, muscling aside his chosen successor, and said he would vacate the post in 2024. He has since made big structural changes to the media empire.

Hackers likely linked to the Chinese state targeted the email accounts of American diplomats at the State Department, according to American officials. The cyber-espionage campaign began in May and was detected on June 16th, days before Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, visited Beijing. The accounts ran on Microsoft’s Outlook service. China denied involvement.

China’s economic planning agency, the National Development and Reform Commission, praised ten of the country’s leading tech companies—including Alibaba and Tencent—in a sign that the government is easing its crackdown on the sector. The NDRC said these firms were crucial for technologies like driverless cars and semiconductors. China clamped down on tech in late 2020 to bring the industry under Communist Party control.

Milan Kundera, the Czech-born author, has died at the age of 94. His most famous novel, published in 1984, was “The Unbearable Lightness of Being”, set against the aftermath of the Prague Spring in 1968. It was translated into scores of languages. His last book, “The Festival of Insignificance”, was published in English in 2015. He emigrated from Czechoslovakia to France in 1975.

Figure of the day: two-thirds, the share of NATO’s military spending accounted for by America. Read the full story.

imgPHOTO: REUTERS

Europe’s two-track economy
Services and manufacturing do not always grow hand-in-hand. But the current divergence in the euro zone—with services growing robustly, despite inflation and rising interest rates, while industry struggles—stands out. The weakness of industrial production worries economists especially, as it seems to be getting worse. Figures due on Thursday will offer a fresh look.

The energy shock in 2022, weaker than expected growth in China and higher interest rates worldwide were all bound to hurt Europe’s industry. A backlog of work from the post-pandemic boom helped compensate for lower current demand for a while, but not any more. In June, manufacturing recorded the steepest fall in outstanding orders in three years. To defeat inflation, a slackening of economic activity is essential, but crushing industry because services are too robust was never part of the ECB’s plan. The hoped-for soft landing may not happen everywhere: lots of cushioning for services, more of a crash for industry.

imgPHOTO: GETTY IMAGES

Prime ministerial problems in Thailand
Thailand’s parliament meets on Thursday to appoint a new prime minister. The country is ready for a young, liberal leader—but it probably won’t get one. In an election in May, the two main pro-democracy parties together—led by the 42-year-old Pita Limjaroenrat—won an outright majority of the popular vote. Mr Pita’s party, “Move Forward”, campaigned on a promise to reform the powerful monarchy and armed forces, two institutions that have long dominated the country.

Unsurprisingly, both have fought back, chiefly by accusing Mr Pita of failing to adequately declare his ownership of shares in a media firm. However specious the allegations, that prompted the election commission to recommend on Wednesday that Mr Pita be barred from public office; his case now moves to the Constitutional Court. Even if he isn’t disqualified from the premiership, Mr Pita may struggle to win enough votes in parliament where senators, all of whom are appointed by the army, have an outsize role in picking the prime minister. Thailand’s political uncertainty continues to swirl.

imgPHOTO: REUTERS

Slim hopes for peace in Sudan
Sudan’s neighbours meet on Thursday in Cairo, the Egyptian capital, to discuss ways to end the 12-week conflict raging on their borders. They have their work cut out. What began as a narrow fight between Sudan’s regular army and the paramilitary Rapid Support Forces for control of Khartoum, the capital, is spreading menacingly to the country’s fringes. The UN recently warned that Sudan was on the brink of a “full-scale civil war”.

Most worrying is the escalating conflict in Darfur, a western region the size of Spain. More than 190,000 refugees have already fled over the border to Chad. They are escaping violence by the RSF and allied Arab militias which the UN’s special envoy calls “ethnic cleansing, grand scale”. Many fear a repeat of the genocide in the 2000s that killed an estimated 300,000 people before a large force of UN and African Union peacekeepers arrived in 2007. With the UN committed elsewhere, at present the region’s non-Arabs cannot expect an international response along those lines. But the carnage may already be similar.

img

imgPHOTO: GETTY IMAGES

English doctors go on strike (again)
On Thursday junior doctors across England will walk out for five consecutive days. It will be the longest strike in the 75-year history of Britain’s besieged National Health Service, and the fourth in the current conflict between doctors and the government. The medics say their pay has fallen by 26% in real terms since 2008 and are demanding an inflation-busting increase to restore it. A week after the latest strike starts senior doctors, who are on a separate contract, will also down stethoscopes for two days.

Studies of previous medical strikes suggest that patients are unlikely to die as a direct result of industrial action—at least immediately. But the disruptions will still cause immense harm, because hundreds of thousands of procedures will be cancelled. The dispute looks unlikely to be resolved soon. In Scotland strikes were suspended after the government offered doctors a 17.5% pay rise over two years. South of the border, though, each side has accused the other of walking away from talks.

imgPHOTO: GETTY IMAGES

American cricket makes a comeback
Cricket has a surprisingly long and rich history in America. The sport’s first ever international match was between America and Canada in New York in 1844. (Canada won.) Cricket was more popular than baseball before the civil war, and in recent years it has been gaining fans once again. On Thursday America’s first professional cricket league, Major League Cricket, begins, when the Texas Super Kings face the LA Knight Riders in Grand Prairie, Texas.

Given the increasing number of immigrants from cricket-playing countries in America, MLC could be a lasting success. Owners of teams in the wildly successful, highly lucrative Indian Premier League have bought four of the MLC’s six sides. Their pulling power means that MLC teams are packed with some of the IPL’s top talent. America is also co-hosting the T20 World Cup—the shorter form of the game—with the West Indies in 2024. Time for the locals to brush up on the laws of the game.

img

Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: What is the statistical term for the arithmetic or geometric average of a group of numbers?

Wednesday: Columbia and Cornell universities can be found in which US state?

Men willingly believe what they wish to be true.

Julius Caesar

 