The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (22:14 GMT / 06:14 Hong Kong)

The House committee investigating the Capitol riot of January 6th 2021 recommended that the Justice Department charge Donald Trump with four federal crimes. They are obstruction of justice, conspiracy to defraud the United States, aid to an insurrection and making false statements to the government. The referrals carry no legal weight; prosecutors are conducting their own probe of the former president’s efforts to overturn the 2020 election.

EU energy ministers agreed to a cap on gas prices. Gas may not be bought or sold for more than €180 ($191) per MWh if contracts exceed that price for three consecutive days, which is far lower than the European Commission’s earlier proposal to cap prices when they hit €275 per MWh for ten days. The cap, which still needs to be legally approved, is due to come into force next February.

Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, said his country would conduct joint naval drills with China in the East China Sea starting on Wednesday. For the first time in three years Mr Putin travelled to Belarus to meet Alexander Lukashenko, his thuggish counterpart there. Joint army exercises by the two countries have sparked concern that Russia is pressuring Belarus to enter the war in Ukraine.

COP15, the UN’s biodiversity summit, concluded with a historic deal to protect 30% of the planet’s ecosystems by 2030 and raise up to $30bn in annual conservation aid for developing countries. The chair of the summit, Huang Runqiu, China’s environment minister, overruled an objection from the Democratic Republic of Congo, which wanted more support for developing countries, to push through the deal.

Epic Games agreed to pay $520m to settle allegations by America’s Federal Trade Commission that it violated children’s privacy and tricked players of “Fortnite”, its signature video game, into making unwanted purchases. Separately, the European Commission warned that Meta is breaking EU antitrust law by giving Facebook users automatic access to its classified-advertising service, Facebook Marketplace, to the disadvantage of competing services. It promised to investigate further.

Binance, the world’s largest cryptocurrency exchange, purchased the assets of Voyager Digital, a bankrupt cryptocurrency lender, for $1bn. Confidence in crypto is at a low ebb following the implosion of FTX, a Bahamas-based crypto exchange. Undeterred, however, Binance is still expanding. The company also bought Tokocrypto, an Indonesian crypto exchange.

The High Court in London ruled that plans by Britain’s government to deport asylum seekers to Rwanda are legal. The court also decided that eight people set to be deported to the African country must have their cases reviewed. In June an intervention by the European Court of Human Rights stopped a British deportation flight to Rwanda minutes before departure.

Fact of the day: $1.6trn, the potential loss in children’s lifetime earnings caused by pre-school closures during 2020, according to UNICEF. Read the full story.

2022 in review: Xi Jinping’s greatest test

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking back on 2022. Today, the year in politics.

China’s president, Xi Jinping, had hoped to use the past year to showcase his power. And in October he did: at the Communist Party’s five-yearly congress Mr Xi secured a norm-breaking third term as party boss. His reshuffle of the top decision-making body, the seven-member Politburo Standing Committee, elevated loyalists. Gone were any checks on Mr Xi’s dirigiste economic instincts or authoritarian urges.

But what followed in November—when anti-lockdown protests erupted around the country—served as a rebuke of Mr Xi. For months official media had hailed him as commander-in-chief of a people’s war against covid-19. “Zero-covid” was his trademark policy. Yet it proved unsustainable in the face of the highly transmissible Omicron variant. Amid public anger at draconian restrictions and a suffering economy, the government largely ditched its zero-covid policy. Now people are expected to fend for themselves. Low vaccination rates could overwhelm hospitals and lead to a calamitous loss of life. It is a predicament of Mr Xi’s own making.

2022 in review: the Republican wave that wasn’t

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking back on 2022. Today, the year in politics.

High inflation, and dissatisfaction with President Joe Biden, ought to have been a gift to Republicans in November’s midterm elections. Yet they barely eked out a majority in the House of Representatives and lost a seat in the Senate. For that they can thank the Supreme Court’s rollback of abortion rights, which energised Democrats, and Donald Trump, whose hand-picked, conspiracy-peddling candidates repelled moderates. Indeed, after their dismal showing Republicans have increasingly questioned whether Mr Trump—who faces several criminal probes—should be their presidential nominee in 2024. Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor, has seen his star rise.

In Washington Mr Biden had a busy summer of lawmaking. First came $280bn-worth of subsidies for semiconductors and scientific research, followed by nearly $400bn for clean energy. The next two years of his term promise to be much less productive; divided government will cause legislative gridlock.


2022 in review: Britain’s year of turmoil

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking back on 2022. Today, the year in politics.

Three prime ministers and the death of a beloved monarch: in Britain, turbulence was the year’s watchword. Boris Johnson’s chaotic premiership finally fell apart in July. After wriggling his way out of numerous scandals, he was ultimately undone by his admission that he knew of sexual-misconduct allegations against an MP whom he had nevertheless promoted in government. Next came Liz Truss, whose plan for unfunded tax cuts backfired spectacularly. Her 49 days in office won her the ignoble distinction of being the shortest-serving—and arguably worst—prime minister in British history.

Rishi Sunak entered Downing Street in October, promising personal decency and sound fiscal stewardship. That his ascension brought relief reflects low expectations rather than Mr Sunak’s own talents or lasting unity among Conservative MPs. Indeed, the tension remains unresolved between the Tories’ hankering for low taxes and their habit of making big-state promises. Moreover, stability is not enough to solve the problems plaguing Britain: low growth, a rocky post-Brexit future and an acute inflation crisis.

2022 in review: Brazil’s white-knuckle election

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking back on 2022. Today, the year in politics.

It was closer than polls had suggested; indeed, the narrowest presidential election since Brazil’s return to democracy in the 1980s. On October 30th Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a leftist former president, claimed victory over the far-right populist incumbent, Jair Bolsonaro, by 1.8 percentage points—just 2.1m votes. In a campaign marked by mudslinging, both candidates were tainted: Mr Bolsonaro by his mismanagement of the pandemic, and Lula by an old corruption scandal known as Lava Jato (Car Wash). (Lula was convicted of corruption and served a year and a half in jail before the convictions were annulled.)

Three weeks later Mr Bolsonaro challenged the results in court, without success. Fears that he may try to block the transfer of power in January, when Lula takes office, have been allayed. But Lula will struggle to govern a country that is deeply divided. Many bolsonaristas no longer trust institutions such as the Supreme Court and what they call the mainstream media. Lula will have his work cut out for him.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: What Wyoming attraction erupts every one to two hours?

Monday: Which musical is based on the story of passengers stranded in Canada after the September 11th attacks?

Ideas are like rabbits. You get a couple and learn how to handle them, and pretty soon you have a dozen.

John Steinbeck
