The world in brief May 19, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 06:17 GMT+1 London

American stockmarkets recorded enormous losses after warnings from retailers aggravated worries about high inflation and its power to cut away margins. The S&P 500 index fell by 4%, its biggest drop since June 2020. After Target, a representative big-box retailer, complained of higher costs, it lost around a quarter of its stock market value—more than at any time since the Black Monday of 1987. Asian markets started Thursday with sharp drops of their own, having taken note of stagnant revenue and slashed profits at Tencent, a Chinese giant of e-commerce and more.

America reopened its embassy in Kyiv, which it closed in February ahead of the Russian invasion. Antony Blinken, the secretary of state, said the move was a mark of the country’s continued support for Ukraine against the “Kremlin’s brutal war of aggression”. Meanwhile Ukraine held its first war-crimes trial. A Russian soldier pleaded guilty for killing a civilian in the village of Chupakhivka and now faces life imprisonment.

The European Commision announced a €210bn ($220bn) plan to end the bloc’s reliance on Russian oil and gas by 2027. The proposal entails importing gas from elsewhere, accelerating the transition towards renewable energy and reducing energy consumption by more than originally planned. Europe currently gets 40% of its gas and 27% of its imported oil from Russia.

President Joe Biden invoked the Defence Production Act to try and alleviate America’s shortage of baby formula. The country is running low because of supply-chain snafus and the halting of production at a big manufacturing facility in Michigan. The DPA requires suppliers to serve formula-makers before their other customers. Mr Biden also announced that the defence department would fly in formula from overseas.

Melvin Capital, a hedge fund once ranked among Wall Street’s most successful, announced its winding-down. Mortally wounded during the memestocks mania of the pandemic’s first year, Melvin was done in by the current slump. It lost half its asset-value shorting GameStop back when Reddit- and Robinhood-fuelled retail investors were raising the roof. A $2.7bn bailouts from Citadel only postponed the inevitable.

Turkey blocked the start of negotiations on the entry of Finland and Sweden into NATO. Earlier, the traditionally neutral Nordic countries had formally submitted requests to join. Jens Stoltenberg, the alliance’s secretary-general, called this a “historic step”. Turkey is the only ally to have voiced its opposition: it accuses Finland and Sweden of turning a blind eye to the activities of Kurds and other dissidents.

The United States Soccer Federation agreed to pay players on America’s women’s team the same amount as those on the men’s. The agreement to create “identical economic terms” for both sides comes after female players won a discrimination case in February. It will also divide prize money from FIFA World Cup competitions—of which the last two women’s events were won by the American ladies.

Fact of the day: 1.5m, the number of cases of unidentified “fever” in North Korea just over one week after it recorded its first case of covid-19. 