The world in brief
August 23, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Arm, a chip designer owned by SoftBank Group, a big tech-investment firm, filed for an IPO that could be the biggest in America this year. The listing on the Nasdaq exchange is set to take place early next month. Arm is expected to seek a valuation of $60bn-70bn. The firm has a near-monopoly on chips used in smartphones.

Seven children and one man have been rescued after being stranded for more than 15 hours in a cable car dangling 274 metres above a valley in north-west Pakistan The children were on their way to school, which, because of the mountainous terrain, they reach by cable car. The rescue required both helicopters and a zip line and lasted into the night.

John Eastman, a lawyer indicted alongside Donald Trump for trying to overturn the 2020 presidential election results in Georgia, surrendered to authorities. He has denied the charges, which he said targeted lawyers for their “zealous advocacy” of their clients. Of the 19 co-defendants in the sweeping racketeering case, he was one of the first to turn himself in. Mr Trump has said he will do so on Thursday.

Attacks on civilians in Sudan amount to war crimes, Britain’s Africa Minister Andrew Mitchell said. He called reports of targeted displacement of the Masalit community “particularly shocking”. Civilian deaths in Khartoum State, which houses the capital, number at least 580 as of late July. In April, a bloody power struggle erupted between Sudan’s de-facto leader and a former warlord, both of whom rose to power in a 2019 coup.

Near Avantas, a village in northern Greece, the burned bodies of 18 people were found after wildfires raged for several days. The victims may be migrants who entered the country from Turkey, according to Greece’s fire service. Temperatures in some parts of Greece reached 41°C (106°F) in recent weeks. Wildfires have already destroyed thousands of hectares of forest on its islands this summer.

The African Union suspended Niger from all activities in response to a coup that ousted Mohamed Bazoum, the country’s elected president, on July 26th. The AU also said it would consider the implications of sending “a standby security force” to Niger. The Economic Community of West African States, a regional bloc, has recently threatened force against Niger’s junta if diplomatic efforts to reinstate Mr Bazoum collapse.

Thailand’s parliament elected Srettha Thavisin, of the Pheu Thai party, as the country’s prime minister. There were no other nominees. Thailand’s government has been in political deadlock since May, when the military establishment was unexpectedly trounced in a general election by Move Forward, a progressive party. Army loyalists have since blocked Move Forward’s attempts to form a government.

Figure of the day: 1%, the share of the British Museum’s 8m objects that is usually on display. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
Donald Trump declines to debate
When the first debate among contenders for the Republican Party’s presidential nomination takes place in Wisconsin on Wednesday evening, the front-runner will be missing. Donald Trump, who is polling 37 percentage points ahead of his closest rival Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor, says “the public knows who I am”.

Eight of Mr Trump’s rivals will be hoping to win a measure of fame on the debate stage. Hot topics will probably include abortion and America’s support for Ukraine. Yet, even in absentia, Mr Trump may steal the limelight. The New York Times reports that he has recorded an interview with Tucker Carlson, a tub-thumping former Fox News host, which will be released just as the debate airs. On the following day Mr Trump can expect more notoriety when he is arraigned in Georgia on charges that he sought to overturn the state’s vote for Joe Biden in the presidential election in 2020. Georgia, not Wisconsin, will be on voters’ minds.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Russia’s struggling economy
On Wednesday Russia will publish industrial-production figures for July. Economists expect an increase of 5% compared with a year before, which would be the fifth consecutive monthly rise.

The trend suggests that Russian manufacturers are adapting to the West’s sanctions and industrialists are finding alternative ways to source the components they need to keep producing goods for both Russia’s military and civilian economies. German exports to Russia’s friendlier neighbours in Central Asia, for example, have shot up suspiciously.

However, the recovery in imports and a slump in the value of exports have contributed to a decline in the value of the rouble, which briefly dropped below one American cent last week. The central bank raised interest rates by 3.5 percentage points, to 12%, to help prop up the currency. In the longer term, that should dampen Russia’s manufacturing output, at least for the civilian economy.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Zimbabwe’s general election
When Zimbabweans head to the polls on Wednesday they will do so in a despondent mood. Nearly three-quarters of people in the southern African country think it is going in the wrong direction, public-opinion surveys suggest. Little wonder: the annual rate of inflation hit 175.8% in June, the highest in nearly two and a half years. Millions have emigrated.

In theory poor economic conditions should spell doom for President Emmerson Mnangagwa and the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union Patriotic Front. But in Zimbabwe voters’ views do not always translate into election results. ZANU PF has a history of rigging elections. Nelson Chamisa, leader of the main opposition party, Citizens Coalition for Change, claims that chicanery is once again rife. He is likely to contest the result.

If there is credible evidence of rigging, it will be hard for Zimbabwe to end its pariah status in the eyes of Western governments. As a result it will only deepen its ties with Russia and China.


PHOTO: AP
Projecting power in the South China Sea
Three big warships—from America, Australia and Japan—are due to assemble this week, possibly as early as Wednesday, for exercises in the South China Sea. The allied flotilla will carry helicopters and fighter planes. The joint exercises are meant to show off allied naval force in the face of Chinese power farther north, in the waters around Taiwan, which China claims as its own.

They will take place near the Philippines, which is already in a maritime dispute with China. A rotting warship, deliberately run aground in 1999 around 200km from Palawan, a Philippine island, serves as a holdout against Chinese expansion, asserting a claim to parts of the South China Sea. The most harmful weapons used so far have been blinding laser beams and bruising water cannon, wielded by China. The Philippines has no aircraft-carriers, so its government’s alliances with America, Australia and Japan help to keep the dispute’s intensity low. China has to think twice about clashing with its small neighbours when they have powerful friends.


PHOTO: AP
India’s nail-biting moonshot
India aims to land the first spacecraft near the Moon’s shadowy south pole on Wednesday, days after a Russian mission, Luna 25, crashed nearby. An earlier attempt by India in September 2019 failed, as did those by Israel, Japan and the United Arab Emirates. The Indian Space Research Organisation’s lander is designed to disgorge a rover to study, among other things, ice that might one day be tapped to produce drinking water, oxygen and hydrogen fuel. India’s mission, Chandrayaan-3, cost less than it did to produce “Gravity”, a Hollywood space thriller from 2013. A successful touchdown will boost investment in India’s space industry, as well as national pride.

It will also make India just the fourth country, after America, the Soviet Union and China, to have landed on the Moon. But India’s is not the last such mission: Japan launches its own on August 26th, and more American missions will follow. The rush to return to the Moon has only just begun.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which American government agency has four production centres in Denver, Philadelphia, San Francisco and West Point?

Tuesday: Which novel by Ira Levin is about a woman who is tricked into giving birth to Satan’s child?

The tongue may be an unruly member—but silence poisons the soul.

Edgar Lee Masters
