Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 11, 2023

A judge on Brazil’s supreme court ordered the arrest of two top security officials in Brasília, the capital, where supporters of Jair Bolsonaro stormed government buildings on January 8th. The order comes as officials investigate the police response to the violent protests. President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva earlier accused Brasília’s police and intelligence of “explicit connivance” with protesters.

Russia’s budget deficit widened to a record 3.3trn rubles ($47bn) for 2022, according to its finance ministry. The country has offset the costs of its invasion of Ukraine with gas and oil revenues, maintaining a budget surplus for most of the year. But European restrictions on Russian energy imports and the G7’s oil-price cap pushed its budget to new depths in December.

The EU and NATO signed a joint declaration—the first since 2018—to tighten cooperation against “security threats and challenges” presented by Russia and China. The agreement is a formal recognition of the stronger ties forged between the two organisations since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. But it was long postponed by fears that the EU’s foray into defence policy would undermine NATO’s role.

Ukrainian soldiers will travel to America to train on the country’s Patriot air defence missile system as early as next week. America’s defence department spokesman said that between 90 and 100 troops will train for “several months” at Fort Sill, a basic training post in Oklahoma. Ukraine has sought the advanced Patriot anti-aircraft missiles for months; the Biden administration assented in December.

The Trump Organisation’s former chief financial officer was sentenced to five months’ imprisonment for tax fraud in New York. Allen Weisselberg had agreed to serve a reduced sentence in return for testifying against Donald Trump’s real-estate business, which resulted in a guilty verdict for the firm at its tax-fraud trial in December. He will probably be sent to Rikers Island, a notoriously dangerous jail.

America’s greenhouse-gas emissions increased by 1.3% in 2022, according to estimates from Rhodium Group, a research firm. That puts emissions back on their long-term trajectory of slowly declining growth after the pandemic, which caused an abrupt drop in 2020 and then a sharp uptick of 6% in 2021. The relative amount of emissions produced by economic activity also appears to be decreasing.

The cryptocurrency exchange Coinbase announced it will sack about 950 employees, or 20% of its workforce, in its third set of redundancies since June. The crypto sector lost more than $1trn last year, amid rising interest rates and the fallout from the collapse of FTX, another exchange. Coinbase’s CEO warned of “further contagion” and blamed “unscrupulous actors”—a thinly-veiled swipe at Sam Bankman-Fried, FTX’s former boss.

Fact of the day: At least 3,000, the number of people kidnapped last year in Nigeria, an almost 30-fold increase on 2016. Read the full story.

FTX goes back to bankruptcy court

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
John Ray, the current head of FTX, the now-defunct cryptocurrency exchange founded by Sam Bankman-Fried, will return to Delaware on Wednesday for the next phase of bankruptcy proceedings. FTX, along with many companies that made up Mr Bankman-Fried’s crypto empire, was put into bankruptcy on November 11th after failing to meet withdrawal requests from the exchange by customers. Some 1m creditors have since filed claims against the firm for assets worth as much as $8bn.

The bankruptcy proceedings are occurring in tandem with criminal proceedings against Mr Bankman-Fried. On January 3rd he pleaded not guilty to several criminal-fraud charges. On Monday he was dealt a blow when it was revealed that Nishad Singh, the former chief engineer at FTX, is seeking a plea deal. Caroline Ellison, the boss of Alameda, a hedge fund that Mr Bankman-Fried founded and majority owned, and Gary Wang, the co-founder of FTX, have already struck plea deals with the prosecution in exchange for information. Mr Bankman-Fried’s criminal trial will commence in October.

Several types of turmoil in Brazil

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week prosecutors in Brazil will investigate how thousands of supporters of Jair Bolsonaro, the right-wing former president, were able to storm Congress, the presidential palace and the Supreme Court on Sunday. Prosecutors are likely to focus on how the rampage was financed and why security forces in Brasília, the capital, failed to stop it. Protesters believe that an election in October—won by Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a leftist former president—was stolen.

Shared outrage might help Lula enact much-needed economic reforms. But the boost to that agenda, if any, will be brief. The economy is weak. Just how weak may become more apparent on Wednesday, when November’s retail sales will be reported. The central bank expects real economic growth of just 1% in 2023. It is being held back by rising interest rates and by concerns about the fiscal crunch Brazil is facing. Lula’s government has promised a new fiscal framework to reduce the budget deficit and a tax reform.

Australia may avoid a recession yet again

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Figures released on Wednesday will show whether Australia is bringing inflation under control. It hit 6.9% in the year to October 2022, down from a 32-year high of 7.3% in September. That may have been a temporary reprieve. The Reserve Bank of Australia predicts that inflation will peak at around 8%, before easing throughout 2023.

Even so, the lucky country is living up to its nickname. Though painful, its inflation rate is well below the average for members of the OECD, a club of mostly -rich countries. Its economy is bearing up despite several rounds of monetary tightening. Central bankers predict that it will grow by about 1.5% this year in real terms, even as many other economies tip into recession. That is thanks, in part, to its energy riches and to immigration rebounding after the pandemic. Australia went almost 30 years without a recession before the pandemic triggered a brief one in 2020. It will probably dodge the coming global downturn, too.

Grim times at Goldman Sachs

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The mood is gloomy at Goldman Sachs. The bank is expected to sack up to 3,200 employees on Wednesday—its biggest round of lay-offs since the financial crash in 2008. Those who keep their jobs will see smaller bonuses later this month. Even the premium workplace coffee is reportedly no longer free.

Higher interest rates and fears of recession are slowing down dealmaking on Wall Street. Goldman’s cuts will hit its investment-banking and trading units particularly hard. Rival investment banks have shed staff, too. But Goldman’s plight is more acute because of Marcus, a consumer-lending venture that has lost money since its launch in 2016. In October Marcus was reshuffled for the third time in almost as many years to help downplay some of its losses. Goldman is also having to cut because it had grown fat. David Solomon, its chief executive since 2018, hired aggressively but then did not carry out the usual annual purge of “underperformers” during the pandemic. Now Goldman seems to be making up for lost time.


A new telling of Shamima Begum’s story

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Before Islamic State was defeated in 2019, more than 41,000 foreigners travelled to Syria and Iraq to join its self-proclaimed caliphate. Shamima Begum, a British schoolgirl, was one of them. Aged 15, she became a jihadist’s child-bride. Britain revoked her citizenship four years later in 2019, leaving her stateless. Ms Begum’s lawyers are challenging this ruling, arguing that she was trafficked by IS.

“I’m not a monster: the Shamima Begum story”, a podcast released on Wednesday on BBC Sounds, scrutinises the teenager’s choices. After more than a year of extensive interviews with Ms Begum—who is now living in a Syrian refugee camp—Joshua Baker, an investigative journalist, re-enacts her journey to Syria in an attempt to find out what really happened, and how to interpret her story. Is she a vulnerable teenager who was groomed by jihadists, or a national-security threat, culpable for her actions? “You do accept that you did join a terrorist group?” asks Mr Baker in the first episode. “Yes”, she says. “I did.”

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: In Greek mythology what was the collective name given to the children of Uranus and Gaea?

Tuesday: What name did Plato give to the group of people who would rule his ideal republics?

Man is a messenger who forgot the message.

Abraham Joshua Heschel
