The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 7 hours ago (22:25 GMT / 17:25 New York)

Russia’s strikes on Ukrainian infrastructure caused mass blackouts, and obliged officials to remove three nuclear power plants from the national grid as a precautionary measure. The western city of Lviv was left “without light” and had “interruptions” to its water supply, according to its mayor. Rockets killed three people in Kyiv, the capital. Meanwhile, Moldova, which borders Ukraine to the east, also experienced a “massive” outage that left over half of the country without power, according to its government.

A “substantial majority” of Federal Reserve policymakers said it would be appropriate to slow the pace of monetary tightening, according to minutes released on Wednesday from their meeting earlier this month. Investors foresee interest rates rising by half a percentage point when America’s central bank meets in December, following four consecutive three-quarter-point increases.

Leaders from the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda and several other African countries agreed to a ceasefire starting on Friday in eastern Congo, following a spate of attacks by the M23 rebel group. Troops from Kenya, Uganda and elsewhere in east Africa will enforce the deal. Congo accuses Rwanda of supporting M23, and recently expelled the Rwandan ambassador.

Georgia’s supreme court reinstated a ban on abortion at about six weeks’ gestation—before many women even know that they are pregnant. Thirteen states have outlawed the procedure in nearly all instances since Roe v Wade was overturned. And yet Americans are not particularly keen on such restrictions: abortion-rights supporters won several victories at the midterms.

Judges from Britain’s Supreme Court ruled that Scotland’s devolved parliament cannot pass a law calling for a referendum on independence without the approval of Britain’s government. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, argues that the result of a referendum in 2014, in which Scots rejected independence, is out of date. But the government in Westminster does not want another vote.

International tourism will reach 65% of pre-pandemic levels by the end of 2022, according to the World Tourism Organisation, a UN agency. The lifting of covid-19 restrictions led to a holiday boom this year, with over double the number of foreign trips between January and September compared with the same period in 2021. A gloomy global economic outlook may yet weaken the industry’s recovery.

Twin bomb attacks on Jerusalem’s bus network during rush hour killed one and injured at least 18 people. Israeli police blamed the explosions on Palestinian militants, though no group has yet claimed responsibility. The blasts, which are the first bomb attacks on Israeli civilians since 2016 according to local police, follow months of heightened Israeli-Palestinian tensions.

Fact of the day: $1.5bn, the losses at Disney’s streaming division in the past quarter. Read the full story.

Turkey threatens to march into Syria

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
“We have been bearing down on terrorists for a few days with our planes, cannons and guns,” declared Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Tuesday. Tanks and soldiers, Turkey’s president added, would follow. Mr Erdogan has been threatening for months a military operation in northern Syria. Last year parliament extended by two years the government’s mandate to move troops into Iraq and Syria. But Mr Erdogan’s argument for a ground incursion has been growing louder since November 13th, when a bomb attack in Istanbul began a deadly tit-for-tat.

Turkey blamed the bomb on the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, a rebel group fighting for Kurdish self-rule within Turkey. The group denied that claim. On Sunday Turkish rockets rained down on Kurdish militants in Iraq and Syria; a retaliatory strike on Monday killed two Turkish citizens in Gaziantep, a province adjacent to Syria. Although tensions are rising, the West has been loth to restrain Mr Erdogan, who has become a helpful go-between in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine.


Credit Suisse refills its coffers

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Wednesday Credit Suisse holds an extraordinary general meeting for shareholders. The Swiss bank needs their approval to raise more capital for an ambitious restructuring plan it announced in late October. Ravaged by scandal and losses, Credit Suisse needs at least SFr4bn ($4.2bn) from investors to pad its balance-sheet. The Saudi National Bank is expected to buy a 9.9% stake, worth SFr1.5bn. That would make it the Swiss bank’s biggest shareholder.

In its new incarnation Credit Suisse plans to focus on international wealth management, as well as its domestic bank and asset-management division. Investment banking will be radically downsized to reduce risk, with Credit Suisse First Boston, the investment-banking arm of Credit Suisse, spun off. It will also let go of its securitised products business. And as it seeks a path back to stability, Credit Suisse plans to lay off around 9,000 of its 52,000 employees.

Legal wrangling over Scottish independence

PHOTO: ALAMY
A decision by Britain’s highest court on Wednesday could determine the future of the United Kingdom. Judges of the Supreme Court will rule on whether Scotland’s devolved parliament, in Edinburgh, may pass a law calling for a referendum on independence without the approval of Britain’s government, in Westminster.

In a vote in 2014, held with the approval of David Cameron’s government, Scots rejected independence by 55% to 45%. But Brexit, which Scots voted against, along with dampened confidence in the British government, could make continued union less palatable.

If the court allows her, Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, wants a referendum on October 19th 2023. But most legal scholars doubt the court will prove so helpful to her Scottish Nationalist Party. Instead, judges are likely either to rule that a referendum requires the approval of the British government, or to declare that the question remains hypothetical until a referendum law has been proposed, prolonging Scotland’s constitutional limbo.

Russia’s security club hobbles on

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO), a supposed military alliance between Russia and five ex-Soviet countries—Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan—began the year with a show of strength. In January Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, Kazakhstan’s president, invoked the organisation’s collective-security clause to deal with anti-government protests. Within hours the Russian army came to his aid. But when CSTO leaders convene in Armenia on Wednesday to discuss regional security, spirits will have dropped.

Russia, which keeps its troops in CSTO countries as part of the security pact, has been overstretched by its war in Ukraine. Family feuds have also hobbled the organisation. Last month, amid a simmering border conflict between Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, “Indestructible Brotherhood-2022” a joint military operation, was called off. In September Armenia asked the organisation for weapons to fend off an attack from its bitter foe Azerbaijan, but the CSTO was able to muster only a fact-finding mission. That may be the best the club’s members can hope for.

Steven Spielberg’s origin story

PHOTO: AP
What makes a superstar film-maker? Steven Spielberg offers a moving answer in “The Fabelmans,” a thinly disguised account of his upbringing that is released across America on Wednesday. Raised by a computer-engineer father (Paul Dano) and piano-playing mother (Michelle Williams), Samuel Fabelman is left shaken after he sees the climactic train crash in Cecil B. DeMille’s “The Greatest Show on Earth” (1952). Sammy (Gabriel LaBelle) spends the rest of his life trying to recreate that sense of awe by making his own moving images.

The director of “E.T.”, “Jaws” and most recently “West Side Story” is America’s best-known conjuror of cinematic fantasy; it is not easy to picture his origins in quotidian reality. But Mr Spielberg paints a detailed, emotionally intelligent portrait of his postwar Jewish suburban family—loving, yet gradually fractured by parental conflict—but avoids the amber-tinged nostalgia of much boomer-era biography. Funny and wise, the film is one by a consummate showman slowing down to reflect.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which marsupial featured as a ferocious Warner Brothers cartoon character?

Tuesday: The French novel “Les Liaisons Dangereuses” was remade as a teenage movie drama in 1999 with which title?

Those who trust us educate us.

George Eliot