The world in brief
August 11, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

America’s consumer prices rose by 3.2% in the year to July, a slight increase from 3% in June. Core prices—which exclude energy and food—increased by a modest 0.2% month on month in July, the second such increase in a row. The news could deter the Federal Reserve from raising interest rates in September.

Iran released into house arrest four Iranian-American citizens detained in Tehran, the capital. As part of a larger agreement, the four prisoners, plus another already under home confinement, will reportedly return to America. In exchange America, which has not had normal diplomatic relations with the Middle Eastern country for decades, will transfer $6bn of frozen Iranian assets and release several Iranians from its prisons.

West African leaders from the ECOWAS bloc ordered the deployment of a standby force to “restore constitutional order” in Niger, following their summit on the country’s recent military coup. The bloc, however, made it clear that it still hopes for a diplomatic solution, especially as ECOWAS members Mali, Burkina Faso and Guinea, all ruled by juntas, have openly declared their support for Niger’s coup leaders.

America’s Supreme Court temporarily blocked the bankruptcy proceedings of Purdue Pharma, the makers of the opioid painkiller, OxyContin. The arrangement, approved by a lower court in May, would have shielded the drug-maker’s owners, the billionaire Sackler family, from future lawsuits in exchange for a one-time $6bn payment to victims of the opioid epidemic. The Supreme Court will hear the case in December.

Tapestry, the parent company of brands such as Coach and Kate Spade, said it had acquired Michael Kors’s parent company, Capri Holdings, in an $8.5bn deal. The luxury mega merger—which will include six brands in total—will help the American firms compete with dominant European rivals and expand to international markets, including in China. Shares in Capri surged by 57% in early morning trading.

Donald Trump and Walt Nauta, an aide to the former president, pleaded not guilty to several additional charges stemming from Mr Trump’s alleged mishandling of highly sensitive documents at his Mar-a-Lago estate. Mr Trump was initially charged in June in that case with 37 federal counts, which he denied; more charges, including that he attempted to delete security footage at Mar-a-Lago, followed in July.

President Joe Biden signed a disaster declaration approving federal aid to Hawaii, where wildfires killed at least 36 people. Flames, fuelled by a distant hurricane’s winds, devastated parts of Maui. Lahaina, a tourist town on the island, was largely destroyed. Thousands were evacuated from their homes, and many fled the smoke by jumping into the ocean.

Figure of the day: $1.4bn, the amount that cinemas in America made in July, the highest-grossing month since December 2019. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
Britain’s economic balancing act
Since the first quarter of 2022, Britain’s economy has oscillated between contraction and growth—of around 0.1% of GDP either way. Forecasters predict much the same for the second half of this year. Official GDP figures for the second quarter of 2023, released on Friday, will probably fit the pattern, too.

In a way, that would be good news. Inflation is still too high and requires some cooling of the economy. The June figures showed that core inflation—which strips out volatile prices such as energy—stuck at an uncomfortable 6.4% year on year (down from 6.5% in May). Policymakers would like to achieve lower inflation while avoiding a deep recession, and have so far succeeded.

Nonetheless, the risk remains that the economy might weaken too much. A recent survey of recruitment agencies found a drop in permanent hires; another one among purchasing managers put the economy close to stagnation. The balancing-act continues.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Reckoning with violence in Haryana
Residents of Nuh, a town in the Indian state of Haryana, are coming to terms with the damage of recent unrest. Deadly violence erupted there during a religious procession in late July. In the days that followed, state authorities, controlled by the Bharatiya Janata Party, which also rules at the national level, demolished houses and businesses in the area, ostensibly for violating building codes. On Monday Haryana’s high court halted the demolitions. It suggested they were a form of “ethnic cleansing” directed almost exclusively against Muslim residents.

Over 1,200 structures had already been bulldozed. Such incidents will probably proliferate in India ahead of next year’s election. An uptick in the number of political rallies and religious processions raises the risk of violence. That, in turn, may tempt local authorities to use demolition drives to intimidate and punish Muslims. The events in Nuh could be a sign of things to come.


PHOTO: EPA
Russia enters a new Moon race
Still engaged in a shameless land grab in Ukraine, the Kremlin has eyes on a more distant frontier, too. On Friday Russia’s space agency, Roscosmos, is due to launch its Luna-25 probe from the Vostochny Cosmodrome, around 5,550km (3,450 miles) east of Moscow. The mission aims to achieve Russia’s first lunar landing since 1976.

The probe will head to the Moon’s south pole to search for evidence of water, in the form of ice, which could help sustain a human lunar presence. But Russia faces competition: India’s Chandrayaan-3 probe, which launched in July, is headed to the same region. And Earth-bound geopolitics risks denting Russia’s space ambitions. After the invasion of Ukraine, the European Space Agency ditched its promise to provide Luna-25 with specialist equipment. Meanwhile, Russia is only a junior partner on a planned Moonbase with China. Alas, the challenges facing the Kremlin’s moonshot sound awfully like its problems back on Earth.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Can Spain’s low inflation last?
Spain’s government entered this year touting some of the best economic figures in the euro zone. A bigger-than-average covid contraction led to a later, stronger recovery in GDP compared with its peers’. Even more impressive has been the low accompanying inflation: in June Spain became the first country in the bloc to get the headline figure below an annual rate of 2%. On Friday final figures for July will be released.

They are expected to confirm preliminary data which put headline inflation at 2.3%. More worrying, those figures also suggested core inflation was 6.2% in July, up from 5.9%. The core measure, more closely watched, strips out volatile fresh-food and energy prices. Spain’s headline inflation has been flattered by its lower energy costs: it does not get much energy from Russia and has won a so-called “Iberian exception” from European Union rules linking electricity prices to gas prices. The downward trend in Spanish inflation may be broken.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Saudi Arabia’s new look football league begins
Football’s centre of gravity has long been in England. The country hosts the English Premier League, the world’s richest and most popular football division. And its champion, Manchester City, is the world’s best team. On Friday City will travel to Burnley to begin a new league season.

At around the same time, another league kicks off thousands of kilometres away in Saudi Arabia. Traditionally football fans outside the kingdom have paid little attention to the Saudi Pro League. No longer. Over the summer Saudi clubs, with some generous state backing, have spent more than $480m signing players from Europe. The most eye-catching arrivals include Karim Benzema, a French player crowned the world’s best in 2022, and Riyad Mahrez, an Algerian star from Manchester City. Reports suggest the Saudis have set aside more than $17bn to develop its league. The Saudi effort may not yet rival the EPL, but football fans know better than to write off an underdog.


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Rasmus Jonlund, Stockholm, Sweden
Ayesha Hanish, Delhi, India
Sam Austman, Kincardine, Canada

They all gave the correct answers of George Orwell, German, error and lethal. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Which British film director helmed “12 Years a Slave”?

Thursday: Which Oklahoma senator, who served from 2005 to 2015, was nicknamed “Dr No” for his attempts to block federal spending?

One always writes comedy at the moment of deepest hysteria.

V.S.Naipaul