The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (03:12 GMT+1 / 10:12 Hong Kong)

Inflation in America reached 9.1% in June, a 41-year high, as the sky-high cost of fuel and food costs drove up other prices. The Bureau of Labour Statistics reported on Wednesday that the consumer-price index rose by 1.3% in June following a 1% increase in May. To tackle the problem the Federal Reserve is expected to raise interest rates by three-quarters of a percentage point later this month.

Ranil Wickremesinghe, Sri Lanka’s prime minister since May and suddenly its interim president, declared a state of emergency and intoned against a “fascist threat to democracy”. The outgoing president, Gotabaya Rajapaksa, had fled to the Maldives on a military jet before dawn on Wednesday, hours before he was to resign. Protesters burst into the prime minister’s office (having stormed the president’s residence on Saturday); police fired tear-gas and Mr Wickremesinghe declared a curfew until Thursday morning.

America’s defence department announced the success of two distinct hypersonic-weapons tests, bringing itself a couple of steps closer to China’s and Russia’s position in a new arms race. Lockheed Martin developed a missile that was launched from beneath the wing of a bomber. Separately, the Pentagon’s own Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) tried out a new ground-based system.

Rishi Sunak, a former chancellor of the exchequer, topped a poll of Conservative MPs in the first round of voting in the party’s leadership contest to decide on a successor to Boris Johnson, Britain’s prime minister. Penny Mordaunt came a strong second, and she is also emerging as a strong favourite of the broader Tory membership, who will vote in the final round, later in the summer. Two candidates were eliminated from competition, including the current chancellor, Nadhim Zahawi.

Turkey’s defence minister said a preliminary deal had been struck to co-ordinate the export of badly needed grain from Ukraine. But António Guterres, the secretary-general of the United Nations, stressed that a formal agreement has not yet been reached. Together, Russia and Ukraine supplied 28% of globally traded wheat. Prices have rocketed since the war began.

The euro briefly touched parity with the dollar for the first time in 20 years, having tumbled 11% this year thanks to high inflation, unsteady energy supplies and the growing risk of recession. The dollar has held up better; one euro bought barely 99 cents on Wednesday. Meanwhile, Canada’s central bank raised its benchmark rate by a full point, to 2.5%, the largest increase in more than two decades.

Netflix said it has taken on Microsoft as a partner in its new ad-supported model, which it hopes can reverse a recent decline in its subscriber base. The streaming giant took a thwacking in April when it shed viewers for the first time in a decade. Cheaper services might bring them back, not least because Netflix’s competition is heading the same way.

Fact of the day: 84km, the range of the High-Mobility Artillery Rocket Systems that America has sent to Ukraine. Read the full story.

The end of the chipmaking boom

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, which makes 90% of the world’s chips with the smallest, most efficient circuits, will report its quarterly results on Thursday. Investors expect a strong showing. Nonetheless, chipmakers face tougher times ahead. One problem is supply. Sales of laptops and smartphones, where half of chips are used, soared during covid-19 lockdowns. To meet demand, investment in production boomed. But much of the new capacity will arrive later this year, when demand is expected to drop. Another worry is geopolitics. Policymakers want to bring more of the chip manufacturing supply chain within their own borders. Such fragmentation would drive up costs and leave chip firms beholden to the whims of party politics. Another chip giant, Intel, has threatened to postpone the launch of two American factories because of a delay by Congress in passing a subsidies bill worth $52bn over five years to American chipmakers. A soaring TSMC may be about to fall back down to earth.


Earnings season for American banks

PHOTO: REUTERS
Monetary policy is supposed to take time to work its magic. But central bankers’ abrupt shift to fighting inflation seriously has caused financial conditions in America to tighten sharply in 2022. Just how brutal the shift has been will be revealed this week as four of America’s biggest banks report their second-quarter earnings. JPMorgan Chase, the country’s largest, and Morgan Stanley will kick things off on Thursday. Wells Fargo and Citi will follow on Friday.

Slick investment bankers, who facilitate dealmaking and issuance, will have been hit hardest. As stocks have slumped and interest rates have climbed, firms have all but stopped merging, issuing debt or going public. Their brash colleagues on the trading floor should have fared better: market volatility tends to lift trading activity and revenues. And higher interest rates can boost the interest income earned on loans by their more pedestrian colleagues running the retail bank. Investors, though, are braced for the worst: JPMorgan shares have fallen 30% this year, compared with around 20% for the S&P 500 overall.

Italy’s government on the brink

PHOTO: ROPI
Mario Draghi’s national-unity government in Italy risks collapsing, adding to the woes of the beleaguered euro. On Wednesday Giuseppe Conte, leader of the populist Five Star Movement (M5S), said his party would boycott a vote of confidence in the government because of its dissatisfaction with measures to offset the effects of the energy crisis. Mr Conte suggested M5S could remain part of the governing coalition, but said he could not “give it a blank cheque”. Mr Draghi has nevertheless vowed to resign if the Movement withdraws its support.

The stability of the coalition matters. Investors are fretting over Italy’s public debt, which has reached more than 150% of GDP. But Mr Conte is under pressure, too. More than a quarter of his lawmakers quit the party at the end of June in a dispute over the Ukraine war. With inflation rising, he has called for a minimum wage and lower taxes to help the poor.

Bastille Day in France

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
The French on Thursday celebrate Bastille Day, their national holiday and a commemoration of the storming of the Bastille prison in Paris in 1789. It is a yearly show of national pride and local festivities, with a military parade and fly-past in Paris. This year, against the backdrop of war in Ukraine, troops from eastern Europe have also been invited to take part.

Behind the patriotic flag-waving, however, the national mood is uncertain. President Emmanuel Macron was re-elected in April, but lost his parliamentary majority in June. He now runs a minority government, under Elisabeth Borne, his prime minister, and faces a hostile and noisy opposition. In the short run, things may go deceptively quiet as the French depart for their long summer break. But with inflation rising and worries about energy costs, la rentrée in September is likely to bring discontent, in parliament and on the streets.

Fashion’s dirty secrets

PHOTO: HULU
Bosses at Victoria’s Secret, a struggling American lingerie brand, will be hoping “Victoria’s Secret: Angels and Demons” draws a line under the sins of their predecessors. The three-part documentary is released on Thursday on Hulu. It focuses on the rise and fall of the brand, as well as the close personal relationship between Leslie Wexner, the former chief executive of its parent company, L Brands, and Jeffrey Epstein, his financier until 2007, who died in prison in 2019 awaiting a sentence for sex-trafficking minors. The film looks at the decades-long personal and business ties between the pair, and an alleged sexual assault by Epstein in a house he owned within Mr Wexner’s sprawling Ohio estate. Mr Wexner has denied any knowledge of Epstein’s alleged crimes.

The documentary is part of a wave of fashion retrospectives portraying an industry in trouble. “Scouting for Girls: Fashion’s Darkest Secret” charts endemic abuse of women in modelling. And “White Hot: The Rise & Fall of Abercrombie & Fitch” takes aim at another former-Wexner fashion brand. Despite energetic efforts by both Victoria’s Secret and Abercrombie & Fitch to reinvent themselves in recent years, these films could turn ever more shoppers away.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which Disney cartoon character (a rabbit) was created before Mickey Mouse?
Wednesday: Which Methodist preacher founded the Salvation Army?

I believe that truth is the glue that holds government together, not only our government but civilisation itself.

Gerald Ford
