The world in brief
August 10, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

President Joe Biden signed an executive order limiting American investment in certain Chinese companies that could bolster China’s military. The order, which will take effect next year, applies to investments in some firms developing technologies like semiconductors, quantum computers and certain AI systems. Most potential investors will simply be required to notify the government about relevant transactions; some deals will be prohibited.

At least 41 migrants died in a shipwreck off the Italian island of Lampedusa, according to local reports. The boat departed from Tunisia on Thursday, but sank after a few hours. There were only four survivors. Italy’s coast guard had reported two similar incidents on Sunday. There has been a surge in the number of migrants travelling from the north African country to Europe.

Shares in WeWork, an American workspace provider, tumbled by 38% in early morning trading on Wednesday after the company said that it had “substantial doubt” that it could keep operating. The embattled firm—once valued at $47bn—divulged lower-than-expected second-quarter revenue on Tuesday. It reported $397m in net losses, an improvement on a year earlier, but still far below target.

Unsealed court documents revealed that the special counsel investigating Donald Trump got a warrant in January for his Twitter account and searched his communications. Twitter (now X) was fined $350,000 for delaying the release of records, which might include such non-public data as drafted tweets. Mr Trump tweeted throughout the January 6th 2021 attack on the Capitol, before being banned from the platform two days later.

Wildfires in Hawaii killed at least six people. The flames, fuelled by a distant hurricane’s winds, devastated parts of Maui; Lahaina, a tourist town on the island, was largely destroyed. Over 2,000 people have moved to shelters, and many fled the smoke by jumping into the ocean. This summer has seen extreme weather across much of the world, including floods in Asia and devastating wildfires in Canada and southern Europe.

Shehbaz Sharif, Pakistan’s prime minister, said he would dissolve the country’s parliament on Wednesday, ahead of a general election later this year. It will likely be conducted without Imran Khan, a former prime minister, who was earlier barred from holding public office for five years. The vote will probably be delayed, after the government said on Saturday that hundreds of constituencies would be redrawn based on a new census.

William Shakespeare’s star-crossed lovers have fallen victim to the culture wars in Florida. Some schools in the state will teach only excerpts of “Romeo and Juliet”, in an effort to limit youths’ exposure to some of its saucier scenes. The Hillsborough County school district altered its reading list to adhere to the Parental Rights in Education Act, a measure that instructs schools to avoid unnecessary sexual content.

Figure of the day: 300,000, the number of people employed in Britain’s life-sciences sector. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Light at the end of the tunnel for the Fed
How effective have the Federal Reserve’s interest-rate hikes been at stamping out inflation? More clues will emerge on Thursday with the release of July’s data.

Headline inflation has already fallen from its year-on-year peak of 9.1% last June to 3% this June. Core inflation—which excludes energy and food costs—has fallen from a peak of 6.6% in September to 4.8%. Both measures are now projected to rise by a relatively modest 0.2% month on month. That would be the second such increase in core inflation, marking the smallest consecutive monthly gains in more than two years.

The projected figures would mean an annualised rate roughly in line with the Fed’s target of 2%, though year-on-year measures may take time to drift down to that level. All this indicates that the Fed’s work might be done. Still, any surprises, especially in core inflation, could easily put the bank on a path towards yet more tightening.



PHOTO: EPA
Decision time on intervention in Niger?
On Thursday heads of state in the Economic Community of West African States will meet to discuss what to do about the coup that ousted Mohamed Bazoum, the president of Niger, on July 26th. The regional bloc had threatened to use force if Mr Bazoum was not reinstated by last Sunday. As the deadline passed, the junta closed Niger’s airspace and claimed that two African countries were pre-positioning troops.

But nothing more happened. ECOWAS is still hoping for a diplomatic solution. Opposition to an intervention appears strong in Nigeria, the bloc’s biggest player, and any operation would be risky. Yet the chances of reinstating Mr Bazoum via diplomacy look negligible. On Tuesday the junta refused to allow a mediation team from ECOWAS and the UN to enter Niger.

At the summit, ECOWAS leaders will probably try to sound menacing, while leaving room for a face-saving diplomatic fudge. Soon, though, they may have to decide whether they really are willing to send in the troops.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
India’s motorcycle sector revs up
The IMF believes that India will be this year’s fastest-growing big economy. Yet the local two-wheeler market, considered by many economists to be a proxy for consumption, remains weak. Annual sales of bikes and scooters, the vehicles of the masses, are still below pre-pandemic levels. That has raised questions about the lopsidedness of India’s growth. It has also led motorcycle companies to shift their approach by targeting the luxury-bike market.

Hero, India’s biggest motorcycle manufacturer, which reports quarterly results on Thursday, has tied up with Harley-Davidson, an American bike-maker. The Indian company recently revealed that it had over 25,000 orders for X440, a jointly made model being delivered from October. Meanwhile, Bajaj, another big manufacturer, has linked up with Triumph, the biggest British motorcycle firm. When it comes to producing the most powerful bikes, however, both companies still trail behind Royal Enfield. The Indian firm specialises in bigger models and has raced ahead, accounting for over 90% of the market.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Rupert Murdoch’s wobbly empire
Fox Corporation and News Corp, two media companies controlled by Rupert Murdoch, an Australian-born mogul, both report quarterly results this week. On Tuesday Fox, home of Mr Murdoch’s remaining TV assets, beat analysts’ expectations; its focus on news and sport inoculates it against the Hollywood strike that has brought scripted content to a halt. On Thursday News Corp, which owns newspapers including the Sun and the Wall Street Journal, will give a business update, hoping to benefit from a perkier advertising market.

But the biggest question on Mr Murdoch’s mind may be political. After Donald Trump left the White House in 2021, Mr Murdoch’s once-supportive outlets distanced themselves from the former president. But some of their audience remained loyal to Mr Trump. Fox News sacked Tucker Carlson, its pro-Trump (on screen at least) presenter, in April, causing ratings to plummet. Mr Trump is now favourite to win the Republican nomination for next year’s presidential election. That result would leave Mr Murdoch with some difficult decisions.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Hip-hop turns 50
This week marks the 50th anniversary of hip-hop. A back-to-school party held in the Bronx, in New York City, on August 11th 1973 is widely recognised as the birth of the genre. The “jam” was hosted by Cindy Campbell, an entrepreneurial schoolgirl, and her brother, DJ Kool Herc, brought the music. His “merry-go-round” technique—repeating the instrumental breaks to lengthen the most danceable part of songs—was revolutionary. The DJ was king in hip-hop’s earliest days, but soon the rapper took centre stage.

In 1979 “Rapper’s Delight” by the Sugarhill Gang (pictured) was hip-hop’s first mainstream hit. Run-DMC was the first hip-hop group to feature on the cover of Rolling Stone magazine, and their album “Raising Hell” the first multi-platinum hip-hop record. Today hip-hop is a multi-billion-dollar industry, influencing music, film, fashion and even language. As Biggie Smalls observed in his ‘90s hit, “Juicy”: “You never thought that hip-hop would take it this far.”


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which Oklahoma senator, who served from 2005 to 2015, was nicknamed “Dr No” for his attempts to block federal spending?

Wednesday: Which actor starred as Norman Bates in the 1998 remake of “Psycho”, the Hitchcock classic movie?

Words without actions are the assassins of idealism.

Herbert Hoover
