The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 25, 2023
President Volodymyr Zelensky said that victory “inevitably awaits” Ukraine as long as its allies fulfil their commitments. Speaking at a news conference marking the anniversary of Russia’s invasion, Mr Zelensky also welcomed China’s efforts in pushing for a ceasefire after it released a platitudinous 12-point peace plan earlier on Friday. Meanwhile, Andrzej Duda, Poland’s president, announced that four German-made Leopard tanks had arrived in Ukraine.

Consumer spending and inflation in America picked up in January, according to data released on Friday. The personal-consumption-expenditures price index, the Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation measure, rose by 0.6% month over month, three times the pace in December. Meanwhile, personal spending jumped by 1.8% after declining in November and December. Stockmarkets dipped at the prospect of steeper interest-rate rises.

Germany’s economy shrank by 0.4% in the last three months of 2022, a larger-than-expected drop caused by falling consumption and reduced capital investment. Germany avoided any contraction in GDP in the first three quarters of 2022, despite skyrocketing energy prices due to the war in Ukraine. Analysts predict Europe’s largest economy will shrink again this quarter, meaning the country would enter a recession.

Janet Yellen, America’s treasury secretary, accused Russian officials of being “complicit” in their country’s invasion of Ukraine at a tense meeting of G20 finance ministers in India. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the host, urged attendees to focus on the world’s “most vulnerable citizens”. But the French delegation said it would only agree to sign a communiqué that denounced Russian aggression.

A Nigerian opposition lawmaker was arrested for alleged money-laundering while carrying nearly $500,000 in cash a day before the country’s presidential election, amid concerns about vote-buying. Chinyere Igwe also had in his possession a list of intended recipients of the money. Moving more than $10,000 undeclared is illegal in Nigeria.

A dozen Democratic-led states sued America’s Food and Drug Administration, seeking to end a requirement that health-care professionals and pharmacies be specially certified to prescribe mifepristone, an abortion medication. The lawsuit is a rebuttal of sorts to another, from an anti-abortion group in Texas that wants to ban the drug. The states asked a federal judge to stop the FDA from “[removing] mifepristone from the market”.

The V&A, a British museum, acquired the vast archives of David Bowie, including letters, lyrics and iconic costumes. Fans of the genre-and-gender-defying star will be able to view the collection in a new venue in London from 2025. Bowie died in 2016 after a career spanning baroque pop to avant-garde jazz.

Word of the week: sakoku, Japanese for “closed country”, used to describe the Tokugawa period, when Japan supposedly cut itself off from the world. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Nigeria elects a president
Polls open in Nigeria on Saturday in what may well be the country’s most competitive presidential contest since it became a democracy in 1999. Elections have brought little respite from corruption and violence. But this match-up offers hope of change in Peter Obi, a third-party candidate. A former businessman, he has liberal economic instincts and has urged people not to vote along ethnic or religious lines but to favour competence.

His rivals are old-school politicians. Bola Tinubu, of the ruling All Progressives Congress, is weighed down by the current government’s failures, most recently a chaotic central-bank policy that left thousands of Nigerians without access to cash. Atiku Abubakar of the People’s Democratic Party, the main opposition, is on his sixth run.

Young, newly registered voters have given Mr Obi the edge, but he lacks the party infrastructure of his competitors. Electoral officials are trusting in new tech to prevent rigging. With Nigeria’s future at stake, that matters more than ever.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Climate scepticism in America
Fifteen years ago, speakers at a conference hosted by the Heartland Institute rejected the scientific consensus on man-made global warming. At this year’s meeting, which began on Friday in Florida, the attacks will be subtler. The prominent climate-sceptical think-tank changed tack in 2018, announcing it will focus less on the validity of climate science and more on the costs of green policies.

Heartland claimed the switch came about because its message had triumphed, but the opposite is true: three-quarters of Americans now believe that man-made climate change is underway. Even policy-driven critiques are gaining less traction with Republicans. President Joe Biden’s climate legislation, like the Inflation Reduction Act, did not tank Democrats’ midterms results in November like an Obama-era cap-and-trade plan did in 2010. That is probably due to Americans’ growing appreciation of the threat of climate change but also to the bill itself, which emphasises jobs, domestic production and—because of forced compromises—room for fossil fuels alongside renewables.


“A Thousand Splendid Suns”
Roya Sadat was an opera novice when the Seattle Opera asked her to direct a new adaptation of “A Thousand Splendid Suns”. But the Afghan film-maker had other experiences to draw upon. As a teenager under Taliban rule, she was deeply familiar with the themes of Khaled Hosseini’s novel. The opera, which opens on Saturday, tells the story of Mariam and Laila, two Afghan women of different generations forced to marry the same abusive man.

The score is by Sheila Silver, who sought Mr Hosseini’s permission to adapt his book a decade ago. She studied Hindustani music—closely related to Afghan classical music—in northern India. In addition to Western instruments, the orchestra features a bansuri (an Indian flute) and a tabla (drums).

Ms Sadat was en route to Seattle when the Taliban took power in August 2021. She hopes that the opera “is a cry so loud that you’ll never forget the women of Afghanistan”.


Freud the archaeologist
Patients visiting Sigmund Freud in Vienna were often surprised by his consulting room. Sergei Pankejeff, a distressed Russian aristocrat, recalled that it “in no way reminded one of a doctor’s office, but rather of an archaeologist’s study”. Cabinets and shelves were crowded with thousands of ancient figurines, ceramics and more. Freud called them his “grubby little gods”. He took enormous care to move them all to London after being forced to flee Austria in 1938.

On Saturday, the Freud Museum in London (his former home) opens an exhibition linking his famed psycho-analytic theories to his deep immersion in archaeology, displaying highlights from his collection. For Freud, the two disciplines were intertwined: as an analyst, he was constructing meaning out of deeply buried fragments. In the show, the Oedipus complex is illuminated by figures of the sphinx, just as phallic amulets suggest an ancient past of primal desires and instincts.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Maia Sandu, the gutsy Moldovan president uncowed by Putin
Ever since Russia invaded its neighbour, tiny Moldova has worried it might be next. Like Ukraine it was once a Soviet republic and is partly Russian-speaking; Russian soldiers occupy Transnistria, a breakaway statelet along its eastern border with Ukraine. But if Vladimir Putin thinks Moldova will be intimidated, he has not reckoned with its president, Maia Sandu, a pocket-sized pro-European who has spent her career facing down powerful, corrupt opponents.

The 50-year-old Ms Sandu was born in a small village where her father managed a pig farm. After university she worked for the economics ministry, part of a generation of modernising young technocrats, then joined the World Bank. Upon entering politics she became education minister, and won public acclaim for cleaning up a corrupt school-exam system that had obliged pupils to pay bribes.

In 2015 protests brought down the government after $1bn was embezzled from the central bank in a Russian-linked money-laundering scheme. Ms Sandu was nominated for the prime ministership, but turned it down when parties refused to fire crooked officials. She set up the Party of Action and Solidarity and ran for president, but was beaten by Igor Dodon, the pro-Russian leader of the Socialist Party. Ms Sandu then waged quixotic electoral campaigns against the Socialists and parties controlled by Moldova’s oligarchs. While she and her volunteers operated out of a deteriorating 19th-century villa, oligarchs ran their parties out of office towers where TV monitors carried the broadcasts of the propaganda stations they owned.

Everything changed in 2019, when Mr Dodon cut a deal (with Russian and American approval) to make Ms Sandu prime minister. Political scheming soon brought down Ms Sandu’s government, but in 2020 she beat Mr Dodon in the presidential race. She has since appointed two pro-EU, anti-corruption prime ministers.

Mr Putin has tried to cow her by cutting gas deliveries and sowing disinformation. On Thursday Russia alleged that Ukraine was planning a false-flag provocation in Transnistria to justify invading it. Ms Sandu promptly rebutted that and reiterated her defiance of Russian pressure. There would be no “puppet government enslaved to the interests of the Kremlin” in Chisinau, Moldova’s capital, she said. She seems to be getting what she wants: last June the EU granted Moldova candidate status.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Terrible people all slightly similar: odd, cowering, wretched (3, 9)

1 across It used to be rough around city (6)

2 across Second digit in numbered list (5)

3 across Leader’s lecture (on Zoom) initially lacks love (6)

Factual clues

1 down A group Putin probably will not officially join (3, 9)

1 across Somewhere with growing numbers of refugees (6)

2 across A place to compare companies (5)

3 across Someone who promised transformation, but has done too little to achieve it (6)



Quiz winners
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Martin Abramson, Ayr, Britain

Maureen Evans, Vernon, Canada

Henry Roth, Petit Valley, Trinidad and Tobago

They all gave the correct answers of Mother Superior, Perry Como, Victoria Beckham (née Adams), the Huron and Eliot Ness. The theme is lakes (Superior, Como, Victoria, Huron and Loch Ness)

Youth thinks itself wise just as drunk men think themselves sober.

Anthony Burgess
