The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 3, 2023

Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, arrived in Kyiv for meetings with Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, about his country eventually joining the EU. Earlier Russia stepped up its assault on eastern Ukraine. Mr Zelensky said the situation in the east had “become tougher” as Russian forces advanced near the city of Bakhmut. However Ukrainian troops there are quietly confident of holding their enemy off.

Meta’s shares rose by over 20% on Thursday after Mark Zuckerberg’s social-media empire impressed investors with an optimistic revenue forecast and plans to keep costs under control. A day earlier Meta reported a 4.5% year-on-year decline in sales for the last three months of 2022, a smaller drop than many analysts had expected.

Alphabet said quarterly revenues grew by just 1% year over year, to $76bn, undershooting expectations as digital advertisers tightened their belts. Net income was $13.6bn. Amazon, meanwhile, reported that quarterly sales rose by 9% year over year to $149bn, above forecasts. Net income was $278m, down by 98%.

Israel’s foreign minister said his country would sign a “historic peace agreement” with Sudan later this year in Washington. His statement followed a meeting with officials in Khartoum. Since 2020, three other Arab countries—Bahrain, Morocco, and the United Arab Emirates—have normalised relations with Israel at America’s urging. Sudan had agreed to, but has yet to implement a deal.

The European Central Bank raised interest rates by 0.5 percentage points to 2.5% and signalled a similar rise in March. Euro-zone inflation has been slowing, due to cheaper energy costs, but at 8.5% remains high. The Bank of England raised its rate by the same amount, from 3.5% to 4%, but suggested that the pace of rises may slow.

Shares in Deutsche Bank fell by about 5% after the bank missed analysts’ expectations for fourth-quarter profits. Despite an end-of-year slowdown, Germany’s largest bank has had a bumper year—it doubled its net profits to €5.7bn($6bn), a 15-year record. The bank was helped by rising interest rates and a febrile market, which proved a boon for fixed-income trading.

Australia’s central bank said that King Charles III would not feature on the country’s new five-dollar note. The British monarch—who is also Australia’s head of state—has traditionally appeared on the currency. A motif honouring Aboriginal culture will take the king’s place. The death of Queen Elizabeth II in September 2022 rekindled a debate on whether Australia should become a republic.

Correction: In Wednesday’s edition of Espresso we mistakenly said that Tom Brady had won best player of the season 15 times. Mr Brady has been chosen for the “pro bowl” game, which features the best players of the season, 15 times, but has only been crowned best player three times. Sorry!

Fact of the day: 45.3%, the percentage of the world’s population that live in a democracy of some sort. Read the full story.

Tempering Ukraine’s EU aspirations

PHOTO: AP
Ukraine’s desire to join the EU lies at the heart of its conflict with Russia—which invaded last year to stop the country’s turn to the West. On Friday in Kyiv the bloc’s leaders will hold a summit with Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president. Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, and Charles Michel, president of the European Council, will trumpet the EU’s massive financial support to Ukraine and confirm that its candidacy is progressing. But they will also dampen hopes of how quickly it can join.

Ukraine’s prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said this week that the country could become a member in two years. EU officials say that is wildly unrealistic. Integrating a huge, impoverished country will be a political challenge. And the bloc demands Ukraine first undertake reforms, including to combat corruption. On February 1st the country’s security services raided the home of a well-known oligarch—earning plaudits from Ms von der Leyen for taking the issue of graft seriously.

ASEAN’s search for consensus

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Foreign ministers from the Association of South-East Asian Nations gather in Jakarta on Friday for their quarterly talkfest. Those watching the region will try to see how the ten-country bloc might be influenced by Indonesia, which recently assumed the chairmanship.

A representative from Timor-Leste will attend, awaiting final approval of its membership application submitted back in 2011. But the military government of Myanmar, in power since a violent coup two years ago, is banned from attending. (A “non-political” representative from Myanmar has been invited instead.)

ASEAN relies on consensus. Yet its menagerie of different models of government, from Communist one-party states, such as Vietnam, to vibrant democracies, including the Philippines, makes it hard for members to agree. The bloc has shown some courage in pushing back against Chinese bullying in the South China Sea. But its feeble five-point peace plan for Myanmar is languishing, ignored by the generals (hence their exclusion). Indonesia will hope to revive progress.


Big tech eyes AI

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
By Friday Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Meta and Microsoft will all have reported their most recent quarterly earnings. Apart from Meta—which saw its share price soar after posting better-than-expected results—news has been generally glum. Sales growth in key markets, such as cloud computing, is slowing as customers cut back on spending. In response, America’s tech giants are increasingly betting on artificial intelligence.

On Wednesday Mark Zuckerberg, the boss of Meta, talked up investments in AI in its recommendation algorithm and its advertising network. Microsoft has, according to the Wall Street Journal, invested as much as $10bn in OpenAI, the startup behind ChatGPT, a popular AI-powered tool that gives human-like responses to questions. The software giant is reportedly working on incorporating OpenAI’s technology into Bing, its search engine.

Alphabet, Google’s parent company, recently introduced a model that generates music from text. It is expected to respond to Microsoft with its own AI-powered chatbot. And the vogue for AI is not restricted to Silicon Valley. Baidu, a Chinese search giant, will reportedly launch its own chatbot in March.

Remaking America’s economy

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
President Joe Biden has a plan to change America’s economy. Audaciously, he has decided that the way to cope with three problems which are too hard to tackle separately is to deal with them all at once.

In the past two years Congress has passed three bills—on infrastructure, semiconductor chips and greenery—that will make $2trn available. The idea is that, with government action, America can reindustrialise itself, bolster national security and dramatically reduce its carbon emissions all at the same time.

Those goals will sometimes conflict. Protectionism will infuriate the allies that support American security, if they lose vital home industries to American subsidies. The subsidies will also create inefficiencies: if green products such as wind turbines become more expensive, then the green transition will become costlier, too. Instead money should go towards technologies that are not yet commercially viable, such as new types of nuclear reactor. Nevertheless, America’s plan to spend $2trn could help save the planet.

What’s it like to be a donkey?

PHOTO: CAPITAL PICTURES
The latest film by Jerzy Skolimowksi, a Polish writer-director, has an unusual main character: a donkey. This unconventional casting has gone down well with critics. “EO” secured an Oscar nomination for best international feature film.

The film tells the story of its titular long-eared protagonist, whose name, EO, is a phonetic spelling of its bray. EO travels from a circus in Poland to Italy, and is betrayed, neglected and mistreated by humans along the way. The director takes pains not to anthropomorphise his subject and the film reveals the world through EO’s eyes—at times literally, with the camera positioned at the creature’s sightline.

What prompted the octogenarian film-maker to work with such a proverbially obstinate beast? Mr Skolimowksi was motivated, in part, by animal-welfare concerns. And his respect for animals deepened during filming, as he bonded with the donkeys in his cast. According to Mr Skolimowksi, donkeys “are stubborn, but they’re not stupid.”

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: What menace features in the TV shows “Black Summer” and “The Walking Dead”?

Thursday: What is the name for a one-wheeled passenger seat attached to a motorcycle or scooter?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Brian Dalton, Washington, DC, America
Bibhusan Chapagain, Kathmandu, Nepal
Carlos Sangil, Madrid, Spain

They all gave the correct answers of Goldman Sachs, Guinea, Adani and Soviet. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

One does not get better but different and older and that is always a pleasure.

Gertrude Stein
