The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 31, 2023

In Pakistan a suicide bombing at a mosque killed at least 59 worshippers and injured scores more in Peshawar, close to the Afghanistan border, as they performed afternoon prayers. Up to 400 people were in the building, which was in a fortified security compound that houses the city’s police and counter-terrorism offices. No group has claimed responsibility for the bombing, but the city has previously been terrorised by the Tehreek-e Taliban Pakistan, a militant group.

Poland said it will increase defence spending to 4% of GDP this year, up from 2.4% in 2022. That would be the highest proportion among NATO members. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has made Poland, its neighbour, anxious. Poland recently signed a $1.4bn deal to buy a second batch of Abrams tanks from America.

Renault tentatively agreed to reduce its stake in Nissan from 43% to 15%, thus equalising the carmakers’ shareholdings in each other. The French firm’s larger ownership of its Japanese partner had long been a source of friction in their alliance. In return Nissan will invest in Renault’s electric-vehicle unit. Talks to improve the fractious relationship have been under way for months.

Jair Bolsonaro applied for a six-month tourist visa in America, where he has holed up since leaving Brazil’s presidency. He aims to “take some time off” and “clear his head”, said his lawyer. Brazilian authorities are investigating whether he incited the Brasília riots against his successor on January 8th; earlier some 40 American congressmen urged the Biden administration to revoke his visa.

Germany’s GDP in the fourth quarter of 2022 was slightly worse than expected, shrinking 0.2% compared with the previous quarter. Despite pressures from high energy costs and rising interest rates, most analysts had expected GDP to be flat. Another contraction, as is predicted for the first quarter of 2023, would mean a recession, which it had previously seemed as though Germany might narrowly avoid.

International Holding Company, the most valuable company listed in Abu Dhabi, promised to buy $400m in shares of the besieged Indian conglomerate the Adani Group. Adani Group’s share offering was set off-kilter last week by a scathing report from Hindenburg Research, a New York investment firm. The report accused Adani Group of market manipulation and accounting fraud, sparking a $65bn stockmarket rout.

America’s secretary of state, Antony Blinken, encouraged Palestinians and Israelis to calm tensions amid “a new and horrifying surge in violence” as he landed in Tel Aviv on Monday. A recent spate of killings, including a gun attack on a synagogue in East Jerusalem and a deadly Israeli raid in the West Bank, has prompted fears that conflict could escalate further.

Fact of the day: 11bn, the total number of wet wipes Britons dispose of each year. So many that they have begun to form islets in rivers. Read the full story.

The IMF upgrades its growth forecasts

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Since the IMF last forecast global growth the world economy has enjoyed good news. Headline inflation has fallen, reducing some of the pressure on central banks to deliver ever-tighter monetary policy. Europe is having a warm winter, easing its energy crisis. And China has ditched its destructive zero-covid policy. The result is that the fund now expects the world economy to grow by 2.9% in 2023—below the long-term average of 3.8%, but up by 0.2 percentage points on its previous projection in October.

The fund warns, however, of dangers ahead. Underlying inflation is still rising, fuelled by overheating labour markets. It will be harder to refill Europe’s gas storage for next winter without Russian inflows and with China hungry for energy. Financial stability risks “remain elevated”. And growth is not quickening everywhere. The fund has downgraded its growth forecast for Britain by almost a percentage point to -0.6%, making it the only major economy projected to shrink in 2023.

Adani’s troubles rumble on

PHOTO: REUTERS
Last week Hindenburg Research, a small American investment firm, published a report calling the Adani Group, a big Indian conglomerate, “the largest con in corporate history”. Adani dismissed the report as a ploy by Hinenburg, which as a short-seller makes money when its targets’ share prices tank, to depress its share price ahead of a secondary-share offering, which ends on Tuesday. If it was, it worked. The market value of the group’s firms fell by nearly $70bn—even though it published a 413-page rebuttal.

The fallout could be more devastating yet. Life Insurance Corporation of India, a state insurer with 365bn rupees ($4.5bn) invested in Adani companies, is studying the issue. Opposition parties have called for a “serious investigation”, pointing to ties between the prime minister, Narendra Modi, and Gautam Adani, the group’s founder and boss. So far Mr Modi and his allies have been quiet. So, too, have prospective investors. The share offering, with which Adani hoped to raise $2.5bn, has attracted few buyers.

Meloni’s steady start

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Giorgia Meloni’s right-wing Italian government completes its first 100 days on Tuesday. Its record, so far, has been reassuring. It has been a steadfast ally to Ukraine while following a conservative, but not extreme, programme at home. The government successfully steered through parliament a budget for 2023. Her Brothers of Italy (FdI) party is polling at almost 30%, compared with a vote share of 26% in September’s general election.

But the smooth sailing may not last. The FdI’s gains have come at the expense of the Northern League and Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, coalition partners that may yet cause Ms Meloni problems, especially over plans for constitutional reform. During the next 100 days Italy should receive its third tranche of almost €200bn ($218bn) on offer from the EU’s post-pandemic recovery fund. But spending is way behind schedule, perhaps due to bureaucratic shortcomings. And while markets have been supportive, heavily-indebted Italy remains vulnerable to a bond market sell-off.

Saving the ​​Colorado river

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Coursing through America’s arid southwest, the Colorado river supplies 40m people in seven states with water and hydropower. But the region and river have suffered a two-decade drought, which has caused the water level to drop considerably. In 2021 the federal government declared the river’s first-ever water shortage. In August last year triggered mandatory cuts to how much water can be used by several areas in the Colorado river basin.

To comply with federal goals, states will need to agree who should cut what to reduce their usage by 2m-4m acre-feet (4.9bn cubic metres) this year, around one third of the river’s annual flow. Tuesday marks a deadline, which has already been extended, for them to submit a plan. If they do not, the federal government will dictate how water use must be reduced. Historically, states have determined their own water rights. Changing that may be unpopular but it may be the only way to keep the river flowing.


Shetland modernises its marauders

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Men dressed up as Vikings will march around Lerwick in Shetland—Scotland’s northernmost inhabited islands—on Tuesday, as they do every year. For “Up Helly Aa”, Europe’s biggest fire festival, a thousand “guizers” parade with torches and burn an imitation longship. This year women, previously relegated to serving food and drink as “hostesses”, will be allowed to carouse alongside them.

The decision follows a long campaign by some locals to update the event, which contributes significantly to Shetland’s tourism revenue. Equality is slowly coming to the islands in other ways, too. In 2022 women were elected to senior positions on the islands’ council for the first time. Purists who might lament that the upgrade in women’s roles is a break with Shetland’s Norse traditions need not fret: Up Helly Aa was actually dreamt up by Victorian do-gooders as a way to distract young men from drinking away the long winter nights.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: What was the code name given to the development of the nuclear bomb during the second world war?

Monday: Which small hand tool for boring holes is also used to describe a piercing stare?

I read Shakespeare and the Bible, and I can shoot dice. That’s what I call a liberal education.

Tallulah Bankhead
