The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (03:18 GMT+1 / 10:18 Hong Kong)

Meta’s quarterly profit, of $4.4bn, fell short of forecasts, shaving more than 12% off its share price in post-session trading. Revenues declined by 4% year over year, to $27.7bn. Facebook’s parent company said it expected revenues of $30bn-32.5bn in the fourth quarter, below most analysts’ expectations. Weaker digital-ad spending continues to crimp growth at the social-media firm.

Countries are failing to meet their climate commitments, according to a report released on Wednesday ahead of COP27, the UN summit in Egypt in November. The UN’s climate body found that only 24 out of 193 countries increased their ambitions this year, despite all promising they would. If countries come good on their current pledges, the world will warm by roughly 2.5°C above pre-industrial levels by 2100, with disastrous consequences.

Russia held its first major nuclear drill since it invaded Ukraine, which simulated a retaliatory strike and was supervised by President Vladimir Putin via videolink. A day earlier America’s president, Joe Biden, warned that deploying tactical nuclear weapons would be an “incredibly serious mistake”. Separately, Ukrainian media reported that the bodies of around 1,000 people had been exhumed in territories liberated in the north-east of the country.

Germany’s health minister set out plans to legalise cannabis, promising Europe’s “most liberal legalisation” regime and “most regulated market”. Karl Lauterbach said people would be allowed to possess 20-30 grams of recreational pot, and that sales would take place at specialist shops and pharmacies. A draft bill could be introduced as soon as this year, though legalisation may not happen until 2023 or 2024.

Gunmen killed at least 15 people and injured another 40 in an attack on a Shia shrine in Shiraz, a city in southern Iran. State media described the assailants as Sunni terrorists. Meanwhile security forces clashed with crowds honouring Mahsa Amini’s tomb in her Kurdish hometown of Saqez. Her death in police custody 40 days ago triggered widespread and ongoing protests against Iran’s theocratic rulers.

Dutch media reported that China has been running at least two undeclared “police stations” used to muzzle Chinese dissidents in the Netherlands. According to Safeguard Defenders, a Spanish-based NGO, the Chinese government has established 54 such overseas operations—ostensibly to offer diplomatic services, such as renewing driving licences. The Dutch foreign ministry called these centres “illegal” and promised to take “appropriate action”.

Britain’s new government delayed the announcement of its fiscal plan—which will have to save £40bn ($46bn)—until November 17th. Meanwhile the head of the Debt Management Office, Sir Robert Stheeman, told MPs that the turmoil in gilt markets seen after the recently-ousted government promised a raft of ill-fated tax cuts (now reversed) was “without a shadow of doubt” caused by domestic factors—and not global tremors, as some ministers had suggested.

Fact of the day: 30m, roughly the number of lives lost in interstate wars in the last 200 years. Read the full story.

A superficial rebound for America’s economy

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Technically, it will look great. Data on Thursday are expected to show that in the third quarter of the year America’s GDP growth accelerated to about 3% on an annualised basis. That will mark a sharp rebound after contractions in both the first and second quarters. The Democrats and Joe Biden will no doubt be grateful for positive headlines about the economy less than two weeks ahead of midterm elections, even if they will probably still face a drubbing at the ballot box.

Viewed in more detail, the economic picture is less reassuring. Arithmetically, strong imports were a drag on GDP at the start of the year. More recently, imports have weakened, reflecting more sluggish domestic demand. Counter-intuitively, that makes GDP growth appear stronger now since fewer American dollars are going abroad. That does not mean that America is in a recession yet. But it does signal that it is losing steam.


Putin’s propaganda parley

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Valdai discussion club began in 2004 as a Russian version of the Davos conference of global bigwigs. Its mission was, mostly, to convince Western elites to invest in Russia. Those days are long gone. When President Vladimir Putin addresses the meeting in Moscow on Thursday, it will be to attack the West and to foretell its downfall.

Last year Mr Putin treated attendees to a wide-ranging three-hour-long discussion in which he lambasted Western liberalism and praised obscure Russian nationalist philosophers. This year’s talk is likely to be similar. The conference’s theme, “A Post-Hegemonic World: Security and Justice for Everyone”, is central to Russian propaganda, which presents Mr Putin’s war in Ukraine as an effort to free the world from Western domination. The audience’s pre-approved questions are unlikely to rattle him. In a version leaked to Ukrainian media, the first asks whether Mr Putin agrees “that the ideology of the Russian state is the ideology of Russian victory”.

The ECB grapples with a rate decision

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
The European Central Bank’s top brass convene in Frankfurt on Thursday to decide how much to raise interest rates. It will be a difficult call: three important economic indicators all point in different directions.

The key number is the euro zone’s inflation rate, which soared to 9.9% in September, far above the bank’s 2% target. That calls for a steep rate rise. But data on economic sentiment suggest a screeching downturn is under way, especially in gas-hungry Germany. That calls for a rate cut.

A final consideration is wage growth. Employers and workers have struck mostly moderate agreements, providing no reason for rate increases. Germany’s chemical industry, for example, has increased salaries by 3.25% as well as giving handouts to compensate for inflation. With energy prices falling thanks to a warm autumn in Europe, the ECB may decide to go soft this time. That could mean a smaller rate rise than the widely predicted 0.75 percentage points.

Credit Suisse unveils its survival plan

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Thursday Credit Suisse will follow a handful of banks in reporting its third-quarter results. But more attention will be paid to the bank’s strategy to recover after a recent string of risk-management and compliance disasters. It incurred hits ranging from $1.7bn with the collapse of Greensill, a lender, to more than $5bn when Archegos, a hedge fund, went bust last year. This month the bank had to cough up even more painful fines in America (linked to its residential mortgage-backed securities business) and France (to settle a money-laundering case).

Adding to the turmoil, its top management ranks have been in a state of flux. Tidjane Thiam quit in 2020 after the bank admitted to spying on former staff. His successor, Thomas Gottstein, was replaced in August this year with Ulrich Koerner, a restructuring expert. Mr Koerner may well be able to whip the venerable firm back into shape; he will need to convince financial markets of his determination to do so.

The populist’s guide to getting ahead

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The memoir of Benjamin “Bibi” Netanyahu is published in Britain on Thursday, following its release in America and Israel last week. Now the leader of Israel’s opposition, Mr Netanyahu was the country’s longest-serving prime minister until he was ousted in 2021. In “Bibi: My Story” he recounts his rise up the ranks and 15 years in office. Other power-hungry populists will find plenty of tips—these include: play up existential threats to your country, don’t be afraid to spar with America, exploit voters’ greatest fears and bash the elite (even if it doesn’t exist).

But Mr Netanyahu’s motivation for picking up a pen is not altruistic. Instead, he wants to convince the world that Israel must remain strong and unyielding in the face of Iran’s nuclear programme and Palestinians’ demands. And he wants to persuade Israeli voters that he is the only man who can ensure this, and that they must therefore re-elect him prime minister in the election due on November 1st.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which American swimmer was the star of a series of “aquamusicals” in the late 1940s and early 1950s?

Wednesday: Which Supreme Court justice died in September 2020?

The youth are not always right, but the society which ignores and beats them, is always wrong

François Mitterrand
