The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 2 hours ago (22:51 GMT+1 / 05:51 Hong Kong)

Ukraine said it managed to prevent flooding after Russia bombed a dam in the southern town of Kryvyi Rih. After a series of military defeats, Russia is targeting Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure; a missile strike on Monday disabled a power station in Kharkiv, the country’s second-largest city. Meanwhile, Moscow warned that if America supplied Kyiv with longer-range missiles, it would cross a “red line” and become “party to the conflict”.

Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, acknowledged China’s “questions and concerns” about his country’s faltering invasion of Ukraine during a meeting with his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, in Uzbekistan. Mr Putin condemned America’s “provocations” around Taiwan, the self-governing island that China claims as its own territory, in August.

Rail companies and trade unions struck a tentative deal to avoid a devastating rail shutdown across America. Tens of thousands of workers in the industry were preparing to strike, which would have disrupted food and fuel supply chains and cost the economy around $2bn a day. The agreement came after 20 hours of talks brokered by Joe Biden’s administration. The president called it “a big win for America”.

Ethereum, one of the most important blockchain platforms, successfully completed a software upgrade that will significantly reduce the amount of energy it uses. “The merge” marks the transition from using the energy-intensive mechanism of verifying transactions, called “proof-of-work”, to the greener “proof-of-stake” method. The upgrade should also make the software project more secure and scalable.

Roger Federer, widely regarded as one of the best tennis players of all time, announced his imminent retirement. The Swiss star, who won 20 Grand Slam singles titles, said that his body had sent a “clear” message that it was time to end his professional career. Mr Federer’s last tournament will be the Laver Cup in London later in September.

New York’s attorney-general reportedly refused an offer from Donald Trump’s lawyers to settle a civil investigation into the former president’s real estate company. Letitia James may now sue the Trump Organisation over fraud allegations. Earlier Mark Meadows, a former chief of staff to Mr Trump, complied with a subpoena issued by the Department Justice during its investigation into the storming of the Capitol on January 6th 2021.

Germany will supply Ukraine with two more multiple-rocket launchers, 200 rockets and 50 armoured personnel carriers, its defence minister said. Christine Lambrecht added that a deal, in which Germany would give Greece 40 infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs) and Greece would hand 40 Soviet-built IFVs to Ukraine, was nearly complete. Meanwhile, the European Commission’s president, Ursula von der Leyen, urged European countries to provide Kyiv with more equipment as it makes gains in a counteroffensive against Russia’s invasion.

Fact of the day: $30bn, the estimated cost of Pakistan’s floods, equivalent to 9% of GDP. Read the full story.

NATO bolsters its eastern front

PHOTO: EPA
Military chiefs from 30 NATO countries will meet in Tallinn, the Estonian capital, on Friday to discuss the new “strategic concept” agreed at the alliance’s most recent summit in June. The aim is to shore up the eastern front and make NATO better able to respond to Russia. The alliance has changed since the invasion of Ukraine. Not only is it expanding, but military commanders are writing new regional defence plans as to which national forces would defend which geographic areas in the event of a war.

Last week Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary-general, said that the alliance was sending a “message to Moscow about our readiness to…defend every inch of Allied territory.” He also called for member states to send more weapons to Ukraine. Those are still needed. But Ukraine’s stunning counter-offensive has left NATO’s number-one adversary looking weakened. A renewed air of confidence may prevail in Tallinn.

A semblance of normality in Russia’s economy

PHOTO: AFP
Immediately after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, its economy appeared to be collapsing. The rouble tanked; regulators had to close the stockmarket. Economists pencilled in a GDP decline of up to 15% in 2022.

It has not quite worked out that way. In one month since the invasion the rouble made up its losses. Since peaking at 17.8% in April, inflation has steadily fallen. That has allowed the central bank to ease monetary policy, something it is likely to do again on Friday. Already below their pre-war level, interest rates are likely to be cut again.

To some degree, Russia has managed to reorient its trading and investment relationships eastwards. The government has also deployed judicious fiscal stimulus, while households and firms have continued to spend and invest. Most importantly, Western sanctions have largely avoided impairing Russia’s exports of oil and gas, the global prices of which have soared. That leaves the central bank free to step on the monetary gas.


Azerbaijan attacks Armenia, Erdogan meets Putin

PHOTO: EPA
The guns have yet to cool in Armenia and Azerbaijan, where a deadly two-day conflict earlier this week was stopped by a truce on Thursday. Across the Caspian Sea, in Uzbekistan, Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, will take up the issue with his Turkish counterpart, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, on the sidelines of a summit on Friday.

Turkey is a firm backer of Azerbaijan. In 2020 Mr Erdogan’s government supplied the country with drones, military advisers and Syrian mercenaries, enabling it to recapture the ethnic-Armenian enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh. Russia, for its part, has a mutual-defence treaty with Armenia, but also has good relations with Azerbaijan. That allowed it to broker a ceasefire between the pair in 2020.

Bogged down in Ukraine, Russia wants to avoid fresh fighting. Turkey meanwhile is more likely to demand that Armenia recognise Azerbaijan’s sovereignty over Nagorno-Karabakh in exchange for peace. Mr Putin and Mr Erdogan know how to wage proxy wars while maintaining cordial relations. Expect them to agree to disagree in Uzbekistan.

Ramaphosa escapes the ANC to DC

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
When Cyril Ramaphosa visits the White House on Friday he will be glad to put some distance between him and his troubles at home. South Africa’s president, who must win re-election as leader of the ruling African National Congress in December, is under pressure from internal enemies and frustrated voters. In Washington, DC, though, he can expect charm and flattery.

Almost half of African countries, including South Africa, have declined to condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine at the UN. So America has sought to reaffirm its commitment to the continent. Last month Antony Blinken, the secretary of state, set out the Biden administration’s Africa strategy, promising support for development and a more equal, less patronising relationship. This reflects America’s rivalry with China as much as with Russia. For all its flaws, South Africa remains one of Africa’s most powerful states—and critical to realising America’s policy. Yet White House officials may find that Mr Ramaphosa has no desire to pick sides. Non-alignment suits his country just fine.

David Bowie on screen

PHOTO: AP
David Bowie’s music often dealt with his inner world, and yet he sported eye-catching costumes to perform for vast crowds. “Moonage Daydream”, Brett Morgen’s new documentary, released on Friday in America and Britain, captures Bowie in his own words, unencumbered by others’ opinions—while imparting an overwhelming sense of just how crowded his life could be.

Music biopics are having a moment, and Bowie holds obvious appeal for ambitious filmmakers. Yet “Moonage Daydream” paints a far more intimate portrait of its subject than do recent films about Elvis, Freddie Mercury and Elton John. Mr Morgen has carefully selected archive footage to create a razor-sharp portrait of Bowie. On occasion he overreaches: the film is more interested in Bowie's philosophy and art than his relationships and the people around him. At one point Bowie reflects that, “I put myself through everything” to grow into the artist he became. This extraordinary, almost extreme film puts the viewer through a comparable experience.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which science fiction novel, by Aldous Huxley, describes a population kept content by a drug called Soma?

Thursday: What is the real name of the Hulk, a Marvel superhero?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Yumi Arima, Tokyo, Japan

North America: Amy Weston, Seattle, United States

Central and South America: Diego Escobar, São Paulo, Brazil

Europe: Christian Jacobson, Århus, Denmark

Africa: Nils Pearce, Kwadukuza, South Africa

Oceania: Alex Gill, Perth, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of House of Saud, health, obese and dollar. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

The beautiful thing about learning is nobody can take it away from you.

B. B. King
