The world in brief
September 11, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

King Mohammed VI declared three days of national mourning after an earthquake struck Morocco late on Friday, killing at least 2,000 people. Rescue teams continue to struggle to reach remote villages. The quake is the country’s deadliest since 1960; with a magnitude of 6.8, it was also the biggest in the area for at least 120 years. Algeria, which severed ties with Morocco two years ago, said it would open its air space to allow aid to reach its neighbour.

Vietnam upgraded relations with America to their highest level—a status previously granted only to China, Russia, India and South Korea—during a state visit by President Joe Biden. The two countries will co-operate on semiconductors and minerals. America is drawing closer to a regime with a bad human-rights record because it wants to counter China’s influence in the Indo-Pacific region.

Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Brazil’s president, said that Vladimir Putin, his Russian counterpart, could attend next year’s G20 summit in Rio de Janeiro without being arrested. Mr Putin faces a warrant from the International Criminal Court, of which Brazil is a member, for war crimes. On Saturday G20 leaders unexpectedly agreed to a joint communiqué, which did not denounce Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

Abiy Ahmed, Ethiopia’s prime minister, said that his country had finished filling reservoirs for its planned dam on the main tributary of the Nile river. The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is expected to produce 6,000 megawatts of electricity, more than doubling Ethiopia’s current capacity. But Sudan and Egypt, which both rely on the Nile for water, view the project as a threat.

Armenian separatists who control Nagorno-Karabakh have allowed in aid shipments from Azerbaijan for the first time in decades. Azerbaijan’s government agreed to reopen some of the region’s road links to Armenia. Azerbaijan, which surrounds the breakaway region, had severed those links for nine months, pushing some of Nagorno-Karabakh’s 120,000 ethnic Armenian residents close to starvation. The agreement should ease their plight.

Ukraine’s spy chief, Kyrylo Budanov, said that his country’s counter-offensive would continue “in the cold, wet and mud”. Mark Milley, America’s top general, said that the operation would slow as weather conditions deteriorate over the next month. Ukraine’s army has pushed Russian forces out of dozens of villages since June, but minefields have stalled its advance.

Coco Gauff, a 19-year-old American tennis player, won the US Open. It is her first grand-slam title. She had lost the first set to her Belarusian opponent, Aryna Sabalenka, but made an impressive recovery, winning two sets to one. Ms Gauff is the first American teenager to win the tournament since Serena Williams, her idol, who did so for the first time in 1999.

Figure of the day: 7%, Chile’s poverty rate in 2022, down from 68% in 1990. Read the full story


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America remembers 9/11
“Will anything ever be the same?” The Economist asked after the terrorist attacks of September 11th 2001. On Monday, 22 years on, Americans will remember the roughly 3,000 people killed (19 hijackers also died) and reflect on how much changed starting with that day.

The “Tribute in Light”, an art installation presented on every 9/11 anniversary, will beam searchlights into the sky over Manhattan to represent the fallen twin towers. Kamala Harris, America’s vice-president, will attend a ceremony at the 9/11 Memorial and Museum, which on the anniversary is open only to victims’ families and dignitaries such as Ms Harris. Joe Biden, who will be heading back from Vietnam, will mark the day with a ceremony at a military base in Alaska. George Pataki, New York’s Republican governor at the time of the attacks, has fiercely criticised the president’s unusual absence from the commemoration in the city. The attack initially united Americans. Now, sometimes, it divides them.


PHOTO: REUTERS
A mixed picture for Russia’s economy
The past month has been difficult for Russia’s economy—perhaps the toughest since March 2022, when foreign investors fled the country and the rouble collapsed. Russia’s currency is once again losing value as Western sanctions hit exports. Higher interest rates have failed to support it. Data published on Monday morning will probably show that the country’s trade surplus is continuing to decline, partly because exports are weak.

But not all the signs are negative. Despite the plunge in the currency, economic activity is holding up, according to a range of “real-time” economic data tracked by The Economist. The deteriorating trade surplus is in part caused by higher imports—a sign that the economy has reoriented itself away from Western suppliers. The Russian economy has a weak pulse, but its heart is still beating.


PHOTO: AFP
Morocco digs through the rubble
The earthquake lasted mere seconds; the cleanup could take months. The death toll from Friday’s quake in Morocco, which had a magnitude of 6.8, has climbed above 2,000. That makes it the country’s deadliest since 1960. Workers have another day or so to find survivors. After that, rescue shifts to recovery. Some Moroccans believe that the response has been too slow. The king, who spends much of his time in Paris, took almost a day to issue a statement on the disaster.

Much attention has focused on Marrakech, a historic city popular with visiting foreigners (it is supposed to host the IMF’s annual meetings next month). But the bigger challenge for rescuers is to reach villages near the quake’s epicentre, high in the Atlas mountains. Roads are blocked and broken, making it hard to bring in heavy equipment. Villagers will be short of food and medicine. They will need prolonged support.


PHOTO: ALAMY
American troops on Russia’s doorstep
American soldiers are in Armenia for military exercises, which start on Monday and continue for ten more days. The drills are supposed to prepare Armenian troops for international peacekeeping operations. They are small scale, involving just 85 American soldiers. But their presence has upset Russia, which has historically positioned itself as Armenia’s main regional ally. It has also rattled Azerbaijan, which has fought two bloody wars with Armenia in three decades.

Russian officials say that the exercise furthers American efforts to draw Armenia into the West’s sphere of influence. Armenia is increasingly unhappy about the influence that Russia has. Earlier this year Armenia cancelled drills with Russia and other members of the Russian-led Collective Security Treaty Organisation. Its government says that Russia has failed to defend Armenia against Azerbaijan, which has reportedly begun to amass troops near their border. If Armenia is indeed gravitating towards the West, Russia has only itself to blame.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The harmful side of ecotourism
Overfishing has caused the number of sharks and rays to shrink by 71% since 1970. Ecotourism companies say that, by arranging for people to dive with wild sharks, they are raising awareness of the risks that the animals face. Around 590,000 shark watchers pay an estimated total of $300m a year for the experience. But a new paper in Scientific Reports, a journal, shows that such activities may harm the very creatures they purport to be helping.

Researchers who tracked whale sharks in Mexico found that swimmers caused the animals to move abnormally, as if they were fleeing a predator. That forced them to expend energy that they could have used for reproduction and migration.

These findings add to a growing list of criticisms of some types of ecotourism. Tourists stress out animals, which can lower their defences against disease. They can also infect animals with diseases, especially when they feed them, or catch diseases from animals. As the ecotourism industry grows, its justification seems to shrink.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.


Monday: What is the common name for the male reproductive cell, or gamete?

Ours is essentially a tragic age, so we refuse to take it tragically.

D.H. Lawrence
