The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (23:11 GMT+1 / 06:11 Hong Kong)

The warrant used by the FBI to search Donald Trump’s home was issued because the Justice Department said it believed that Mr Trump violated the Espionage Act, which prohibits the possession or transmission of national security information. Mr Trump did not object to a request by Merrick Garland, the attorney-general, that a Florida court unseal the warrant. The agents who searched Mar-a-Lago reportedly removed 11 sets of classified documents, including material marked “top secret” and information on French president Emmanuel Macron.

Five Chinese state-owned firms will apply to delist from the New York Stock Exchange, including China Life Insurance and energy giants PetroChina and Sinopec. All five failed to meet American auditing standards earlier this year. The price of other Chinese stocks listed in America tumbled in response to the news. Sino-American tensions are running high following the visit of Nancy Pelosi, an American politician, to Taiwan.

Salman Rushdie, the author of “The Satanic Verses”, was stabbed several times when he was about to deliver a lecture in Chautauqua, New York. Mr Rushdie was airlifted to hospital; New York’s governor, Kathy Hochul, said he was alive and getting the care he needs. His attacker has been taken into police custody. “The Satanic Verses” inspired controversy upon its release in 1988. Some Muslims said it was blasphemous, and Iran called for Mr Rushdie’s death.

Britain declared a drought in parts of the country for the first time since 2018. The announcement came amid a heatwave and on the heels of Britain’s driest July in almost 90 years. Several water companies have imposed restrictions on water usage, prohibiting customers from using hoses on their cars or gardens.

A trip by China’s president, Xi Jinping, reportedly being planned for November, may include a first face-to-face meeting with his American counterpart Joe Biden since Mr Biden became president. They may get together on the margins of multilateral summits in Indonesia or Thailand. Reports also suggest that Mr Xi, who has not left China for nearly three years, may visit Saudi Arabia this month. The Chinese foreign ministry refused to comment.

Taiwan will no longer host WorldPrideTaiwan 2025, following a request from the event’s licensing body to drop the word “Taiwan” from the event title. At the behest of China, international organisations often insist that the self-governing island uses names other than “Taiwan”. But the WorldPride organisers said that capitulating to the request on this occasion would “harm the interests of Taiwan”.

Britain’s GDP contracted by 0.1% in the three months to June, compared with the previous quarter. The Office for National Statistics attributed most of the decline in services output to a fall in health and social work activities related to covid-19. Household consumption fell by 0.2%. The new GDP numbers signal another blow to Britain’s faltering economy.

Correction: our “Fact of the day” on Friday incorrectly attributed an increase in violent crimes involving guns to states in America where right-to-carry laws were struck down. The increase was actually in states where the laws were adopted. Sorry

The Aloha State votes

PHOTO: REUTERS
More Hawaiians than usual may vote in the state’s primary elections on Saturday. Hawaii began mailing ballots to voters in 2020 to boost its turnout, the lowest in America. By August 9th, 25% of ballots had already been returned.

The surge of new voters is unlikely to help the Republican Party in a state that is deep blue. David Ige, the governor, and all four members of Congress are Democrats. Mr Ige has reached his term limit but his replacement will probably be Joshua Green, his current deputy. Brian Schatz, one of the Senate’s loudest voices for climate-change legislation, should also glide to victory in his primary. Should they win their general-election races in November, they will have much to do. The pandemic battered the state’s tourism-dependent economy, the Ukraine war strained its energy supplies—petrol is costlier in Hawaii than in any other state—and a perennial shortage of affordable housing has worsened. The Aloha State is blue in more ways than one.

Warranted action: dissecting the FBI raid

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Four days after the FBI searched Donald Trump’s home at Mar-a-Lago, in Florida, more details are emerging. It was ostensibly part of an investigation into the ex-president’s alleged removal of classified documents from the White House when he left it. An inventory list from the search warrant, unsealed on Friday and leaked to several newspapers, showed that FBI agents seized 11 sets of documents, some marked “top secret”, meaning they may not leave secure government-approved facilities.

The most explosive detail is not what was in the boxes—which included Mr Trump’s pardon of Roger Stone, one of his fixers, and “info re: the President of France”. Rather it is the three statutes under which the warrant was granted. One was against “gathering, transmitting or losing defence information”. That law is part of the Espionage Act. Why Mr Trump may have taken the documents, and whether charges will follow, is unknown. But could he be indicted on laws against spying?

Dark days for the All Blacks

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The All Blacks, New Zealand’s men’s rugby union team, has a compelling claim to be the best sports team ever. Since their first game in 1903, they have won more than 75% of the matches they have played, and three World Cups. By those high standards, recent results have been disastrous. In July they lost a series at home to Ireland. Last week they lost in South Africa. The second (and final) match in that series is played on Saturday. Ian Foster, the coach, needs a win to keep his job.

But there are also structural weaknesses hurting the team. Changes to the domestic club-level competition have cut off exposure to sides from outside the Pacific. Participation rates are falling as kids turn to other sports. The team’s financial future may be secure, thanks to a private-equity injection of $129m earlier this year. But a return to all-conquering form, especially before the World Cup in 2023, looks far less certain.

A film musician goes solo

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Danny Elfman, legendary composer of nearly 100 Hollywood film scores, including the soundtracks of “Good Will Hunting” and “Spider-Man”, this week releases a solo album. “Bigger. Messier.” comprises reworked versions of songs from “Big Mess”, an industrial art-rock LP released last year, and features stars such as Iggy Pop and Trent Reznor.

This is not the radical sideways step it may seem. Mr Elfman was leader of a new-wave band called Oingo Boingo when two Hollywood fans, Tim Burton and Paul Reubens, invited him to score “Pee-wee’s Big Adventure”, a breakout hit in 1985.

Back then Mr Elfman wanted “to embrace film scoring from a classical approach”. That meant putting his rock instincts aside—until now. In this album, he says he is free to express himself. And that expression is 90 minutes of heavy-duty avant-garde electronica as epic and dramatic as any blockbuster movie.

Weekend profile: Robert Habeck, Germany’s energy hero

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Olaf Scholz may be Germany’s chancellor, but to many the man of the hour in Berlin is Robert Habeck, his vice-chancellor and minister for economy and climate change. This is not just because the senior-most Green in the three-party ruling coalition pips his boss in the polls: since this government took office in December Mr Habeck has consistently been named the country’s most popular politician. It is also because his job as energy supremo puts the chatty, studiedly casual 52-year-old on the front lines of the biggest crisis Germany has faced in a generation.

By most accounts Mr Habeck has done well. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February placed Germany in a dilemma. Decades of misguided policy had hooked Europe’s biggest economy on Russian fossil fuels. Pipelines from Siberia supplied 55% of its natural gas. But with a mix of charm, money and dealmaking, Mr Habeck has helped shield Germany from potential blackmail by trimming gas use and finding new suppliers. Enhancing his reputation for pragmatism (some would say lack of principle), the vice-chancellor muted his Green beliefs to reignite mothballed coal-fired power stations. A similar nose-holding green light may also keep Germany’s last three nuclear power plants open. They were to close in December as part of a longstanding plan to scrap nuclear power. Polls show even a majority of Green voters realise that, right now, that would be stupid.

Mr Habeck, who hails from Germany’s northernmost state, Schleswig-Holstein, earned a PhD in literature before entering politics. But it is his trademark three-day stubble, preference for open-necked shirts and penchant for blunt honesty that seem to please voters. He has also won points for working smoothly with Annalena Baerbock, the foreign minister, whose choice as the Greens’ candidate for chancellor in last year’s election was tough on Mr Habeck, by his own admission. But the easygoing manner disguises a sharp statesman. Visiting Ukraine last summer, Mr Habeck suggested supplying the country with defensive weapons. Rivals from left, right and centre called him irresponsible. Who looks silly now?

The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Marilou Cristobal, Muntinlupa City, Philippines

North America: Ron Toogood, Moncton, Canada

Central and South America: Celso Covre, Brasília, Brazil

Europe: Bernt Arne Ødegaard, Fitjar, Norway

Africa: Christine Reiter, Tunis, Tunisia

Oceania: Andrew McMenamin, Lincoln, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of John Mitchell, LL Bean, Joseph Conrad, Steve Irwin and Lance Armstrong. The theme is astronauts who walked on the moon: Edgar Mitchell, Alan Bean, Pete Conrad, James Irwin and Neil Armstrong.

We all have our time machines, don't we. Those that take us back are memories… And those that carry us forward, are dreams.

H. G. Wells
