The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (23:07 GMT+1 / 06:07 Hong Kong)

Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, is “failing on all of his military strategic objectives”, said Britain’s chief of the defence staff, Admiral Sir Tony Radakin. Over the weekend Ukraine’s forces struck several Russian military strongholds in southern Ukraine. After their lightning advance in the north-east, troops are eager to capitalise on their momentum. “This is preparation for the next sequence,” said Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, in his latest nightly address.

Charles III met Britain’s prime minister, Liz Truss, at Buckingham Palace ahead of the funeral of Elizabeth II on Monday. Over the weekend the king also met the prime ministers of other countries where he is head of state, including Australia, Canada and New Zealand. World leaders, including America’s president, Joe Biden, and 500 dignitaries will attend the ceremony in ​​Westminster Abbey, which will conclude 11 days of national mourning.

The European Commission proposed to suspend billions of euros in funds for Hungary over corruption concerns. The EU’s executive arm said the sanctions, which must be approved by a qualified majority of member states, would protect its budget against breaches of the rule of law. It is the first use of a mechanism introduced two years ago in response to concerns that Hungary and Poland are nobbling judges, journalists and activists.

The entire island of Puerto Rico lost power after being hit by Hurricane Fiona, according to a tweet from its governor, Pedro Pierluisi. President Joe Biden approved an emergency declaration for the territory, which allows the release of federal resources for relief efforts. Meanwhile, thousands of people on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu have been urged to leave their homes, as Typhoon Nanmadol made landfall. The storm threatens 500mm of rainfall.

Alla Pugacheva, one of Russia’s best-known singers, spoke out against her country’s actions in Ukraine and bemoaned its “illusory aims”. She asked to be declared a “foreign agent”, in solidarity with her singer husband, Maxim Galkin. Russia’s justice ministry accused Mr Galkin of conducting political activities on behalf of Ukraine after he too criticised Russia’s invasion. . At home discontent with the war has been growing.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, said his country would apply for full membership of the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation, a regional talking shop that includes China, Russia, India and much of Central Asia. Turkey is currently a “dialogue member”, and would be the club’s first NATO signatory. The SCO, which met in Uzbekistan this week, was formed to promote closer security and economic links.

Police in Serbia arrested 64 people as right-wing and religious protesters turned out to demonstrate against an LGBT pride march that was taking place in the capital, Belgrade. The march itself had initially been banned over fears that it would stoke violence.

Fact of the day: 99%, the share of Kenyan migrant workers abused in the Gulf, according to a poll. Read the full story.

Queen Elizabeth II is laid to rest

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Monday, just before 11am, the coffin of Queen Elizabeth II will be carried into Westminster Abbey, where she was crowned almost 70 years ago. A lady-in-waiting suggested to her, just before she went into her coronation, that she must be nervous. Yes, Elizabeth replied. And added—referring to a horse that she had running in a race four days later—“I really do think Aureole will win.”

In the intervening decades, it was less for her humour than her solemn devotion to duty that she would become known: she crossed the world, smiling, waving and working. She swore in her final prime minister, her fifteenth, just two days before she died. Now, people are coming to her: thousands queued to see her coffin and on Monday world leaders, including Joe Biden, will converge on London to see her funeral—and the close of the Elizabethan era.

Republicans struggle to self-define

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Monday Kevin McCarthy, the Republican leader in the House of Representatives, is set to unveil his party’s “Commitment to America”. Consciously modelled after the “Contract with America”—a prospectus of what Republicans would do if they won the House in 1994, which helped them win back control of Congress in midterm election—Mr McCarthy’s similarly aims to pinpoint what Republicans stand for.

But the party has shown little interest in sketching a policy agenda. Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader in the Senate, believes such documents are counterproductive, and will not weigh in. Rick Scott, a senator from Florida, has pitched a plan under which all federal legislation would expire after five years unless explicitly reauthorised. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina befuddled many last week when he pitched a nationwide abortion limit at 15 weeks—which would be stricter than in many blue states. Expect more policy incoherence.

Japan’s knotty celebration of longevity

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Monday Japan celebrates its Keiro no Hi or “Respect for the Aged Day”, a public holiday. While covid has halted annual events and gatherings for a third consecutive year, Japanese still mark it by sending gifts to grandparents, a boon for e-commerce firms.

But the celebration of Japan’s longevity is also a reminder of the country’s deepening demographic woes. Recently published statistics show the number of people aged 65 and over in Tokyo, the capital, reached a record level this year. Across the whole of Japan their share is around 30%. In April the country dropped its legal age for adulthood from 20 to 18, creating roughly 2m “new” adults overnight.

Japanese seniors appear increasingly ambivalent about the holiday. Many who are active and working distance themselves from the event. Some take offence to being called “old”. As much as filial piety matters in Japan, Keiro no Hi may need a rejuvenation.

The Global Fund replenishes its coffers

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Global Fund, founded in 2002 by governments and businesses with the purpose of fighting AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis, holds its so-called replenishment meeting in New York on Monday. It wants to raise $18bn to spend over the next three years in order to save 20m lives. The fund’s track record suggests it would use that money wisely. Its officials claim to have prevented 50m deaths between 2002 and 2021. Last year the fund helped put 23.3m people on antiretroviral HIV drugs, treat 5.3m people for tuberculosis and distribute 133.2m mosquito nets.

But covid has proved a setback. Key metrics for all three diseases worsened in 2020, including the percentage of people treated for TB, which fell from 69% to 57%. Deaths from the infection rose for the first time in a decade. The successful alliance of governments and the private sector will need to continue rising to the challenge.

Stop the sun, refreeze the poles

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Stratospheric aerosol injections may sound like a wacky way to wind back climate change. A fleet of aircraft pump fine dust into the upper atmosphere until it sheaths the entire planet, reflecting sunlight and cooling the Earth. But when limited to polar regions, which are warming at a faster pace than the rest of the world, SAI begins to look less far-fetched.

A new study published in Environmental Research Communications, a journal, finds that SAI could be deployed to refreeze the poles. Microscopic aerosol particles would be released at latitudes of 60 degrees north and south, and drift poleward to shade the ice. This, say the modellers, would cool the Arctic and Antarctica by 2°C per year, which would slow the pace of sea-level rise. But the method also has its drawbacks: considerable extra carbon emitted by roughly 125 tanker aircraft and an estimated cost of $11bn a year.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Atlas, Luna and Madagascan sunset are all types of what creature?

Life is a hot day, perhaps death is a cool night.

Mika Waltari
