The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 22:54 GMT+1 / 05:54 Hong Kong

America will provide Ukraine with precision-guided missiles that can strike targets nearly 84km away, as part of a new $700m military aid package. The commitment was only made after senior Ukrainian officials assured America that the weapons would not be used against targets inside Russia. Writing in the New York Times, Joe Biden said he does not want a war between NATO and Russia or to oust Vladimir Putin. America’s goal is a “democratic, independent” Ukraine with the means to “defend itself against further aggression.”

Russian forces are occupying greater swathes of the industrial city of Severodonetsk, in eastern Ukraine. The Ukrainian army said that Russia was pounding the surrounding area with artillery. On Tuesday the governor of Luhansk, a province in the east of Ukraine, said that Russian forces hit a tank full of nitric acid at a facility in Severodonetsk. Residents were told to stay in shelters to avoid the fallout.

Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Meta, Facebook’s parent company, said she would step down in the autumn after 14 years. Ms Sandberg served as deputy to Mark Zuckerberg, Meta’s founder, turning the social-media firm into an advertising juggernaut and steering its public image. Ms Sandberg did not say what she will do next; she will remain on Meta’s board. Javier Olivan, currently chief growth officer, will replace her. Mr Zuckerberg said Ms Sandberg “taught me how to run a company.”

Early referendum results showed Danes voting decisively to adopt the European Union’s defense policies. With ballots counted in 55 of 92 electoral districts, nearly two-thirds of voters said they would ditch Denmark’s opt-out from EU defense compacts. Danes opted out 30 years ago, but Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has altered how European countries see their security.

The European Commission agreed to fund a €35bn ($38bn) economic recovery plan for Poland, but only if Warsaw commits to reforming its judiciary. The deal, which must be approved by EU member states, was long delayed by a row over Poland’s moves to quash judicial independence. Ursula von der Leyen, president of the commission, is expected to announce the deal on Thursday in Warsaw.

China’s state planning agency outlined a new five-year plan for the renewable sector. It plans to increase the percentage of power on the grid from renewable sources to a third by 2030, up from almost 29% in 2020. The country aims to raise the share of green energy use in the overall economy to 20%. China is currently the world’s biggest emitter of climate-damaging greenhouse gases.

America announced that it will soon begin new trade talks with Taiwan. The island was recently excluded from a US-led initiative, the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework, designed to limit Chinese economic ambitions in the region. There had been fears that some countries might be wary of joining the IPEF if it included Taiwan, which China claims as its own.

Fact of the Day: 2,500, the number of anti-aircraft missiles that Germany has sent to Ukraine since the start of the Russian invasion. 

The bloody battle for Severodonetsk
The endgame for the industrial town of Severodonetsk is under way. Severodonetsk sits in a vulnerable salient in eastern Ukraine jutting into Russian-held territory; the invaders have been pounding it, and the surrounding area, with everything they have. Russian television correspondents have already claimed victory. That is probably an exaggeration, but Russian troops evidently have a solid foothold in the city: fierce battles are taking place in central streets. Local sources suggest that the Ukrainian army has already begun to pull back, portending a broader retreat.

Russia has committed a substantial proportion of its forces to taking Severodonetsk and Lyman, a transport hub and possible bridgehead for crossing the Donets river farther north. These modest battlefield aims are a far cry from the Kremlin’s initial ambition of taking over Ukraine entirely. They also fall some way short of the more recently stated objective of occupying the whole Donbas region, which comprises Luhansk, the region where Severodonetsk is located, and neighboring Donetsk. But the advance is real.

OPEC resists the West
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies, which include Russia, meet on Thursday to decide on their oil-production target for the coming month. They are widely expected to stick to a modest increase of about 400,000 barrels per day. If so, that will frustrate a West grappling with soaring prices.

The price of oil is hovering around $120 a barrel again, not far from the $127 decade-high it reached in March. But OPEC has been resisting Western pressure to increase its output more quickly. One reason is the frosty relationship between President Joe Biden’s administration and Saudi Arabia, OPEC’s most important member. Another is the group’s uncertainty about how much Russian oil will end up disappearing from the market as a result of Western sanctions.

But OPEC also appears to have little spare capacity to pump more oil. For months it has struggled to meet even its modest output targets. The oil-price rally does not seem to be running out of gas yet.


Netflix faces its shareholders
The world’s biggest streamer applies a “keeper” test to employees, firing anyone whose performance is deemed merely adequate. After a turbulent few months, some have started to wonder whether Netflix’s joint bosses, Reed Hastings and Ted Sarandos, pass the test. On Thursday the pair will face shareholders at the company’s annual meeting.

Investors are shellshocked; its shares have dropped by two-thirds this year. Despite lavish spending on programes like “Stranger Things”, the final season of which was launched last week, new subscribers have dried up.

Netflix promises a cheaper, ad-supported tier to tempt new members. It is experimenting with new content, such as games and live programing. Yet as competition from the likes of Disney+ increases, and household budgets are stretched by inflation, the danger is that subscribers decide Netflix itself is no longer a “keeper.”

Britain celebrates 70 years of Queen Elizabeth II
Her first solo engagement took place in 1942, when she inspected the Grenadier Guards at Windsor Castle. More than 21,000 ribbon-cuttings and plaque-unveilings have followed, along with 200-plus official portraits and over 300,000 congratulatory telegrams sent to centenarian subjects. Between June 2 and 5 Britain will celebrate another of Queen Elizabeth II’s milestones: the platinum jubilee, to mark her 70 years on the throne.

Much of what will unfold is objectively ludicrous. People in large hats will parade around on horses. A lunch in Windsor will see an attempt on the coveted record of the world’s longest table. But the jubilee is no trifling matter. A 70-year reign is unprecedented for an English monarch. And the queen commands widespread approval. Eight in ten Britons have a positive opinion of her; every single age group thinks of her favorably. The virtues of continuity and consensus that the queen represents are sorely lacking in other branches of the British state.

The Spelling Bee is losing its spell
It is as much a contest of nerves as it is of words. Yoga and meditation are part of players’ daily routines, as is memorizing the Latin, Greek and German roots of thousands of words. On Thursday 234 children aged 7 to 15 will tackle streams of obscure words at the finals of the Scripps National Spelling Bee, which will be held in-person in Maryland after a three-year hiatus. The competition has grown increasingly hard over the decades. In 1928 the winning word was “knack.” Last year Zaila Avant-Garde, the first African-American to win the competition, won the bee with a correct spelling of “Murraya”, a genus of tropical Asiatic and Australian trees. She celebrated her triumph with a pirouette.

But the pandemic has taken some sheen off the event. This year the local newspapers and other publications that traditionally sponsored regional bees have mostly backed out after being hit hard by the pandemic. The contestant roll is less than half the size of that in 2019. Still, for the freckle-faced logophiles competing in this one-of-a-kind linguistic adventure, Thursday’s final will offer unbeetable delites.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which fashionable French ski resort, close to the Italian border, was the childhood home of triple Olympic champion Jean-Claude Killy?

Wednesday: Which silent film comedian was dubbed “the great stoneface”?
