The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (22:15 GMT / 06:15 Hong Kong)

America warned that Iran and Russia are entering a “full-fledged defence partnership” that may include the joint production of drones. Russia will provide fighter jets to Iran and is training its pilots, said a spokesman for America’s national security council. In turn Iran is believed to have sent armed drones for Russia’s use in Ukraine. Separately, President Vladimir Putin said he may cut oil output in response to the West’s “stupid” price cap on Russian oil exports.

A Russian court sentenced Ilya Yashin, an opposition politician, to eight and half years in prison for charges of spreading false information to discredit the Russian army. Mr Yashin is the most high-profile Russian dissident who has been jailed for opposing the invasion of Ukraine. He chose not to leave Russia and said in court this week that he “must speak the truth loudly”.

Kyrsten Sinema, a senator from Arizona, said she would leave the Democratic Party and become an independent, just days after the Democrats won an expanded majority of 51-49 in the Senate. The Democrats will still hold a majority without her, because America’s vice-president, Kamala Harris, gets a deciding vote. Ms Sinema wrote that she had “never fit perfectly in either national party” in part because of “extreme” voices driving them towards their fringes.

Markus Dohle, chief executive of Penguin Random House, the world’s biggest book publisher, resigned after a deal to buy Simon & Schuster, a rival, collapsed in October. American judges blocked the planned $2.2bn merger on the grounds that it could damage competition in the publishing industry. The failed deal cost the publisher $200m in termination fees.

America imposed sanctions against two Chinese citizens and their network of ten companies over alleged illegal fishing and human-rights abuses. Two particular companies are accused of illegally finning and shipping endangered shark species and mistreating workers. The designation marks the first time sanctions have been imposed on a company listed on the NASDAQ, an American stock exchange.

Britain’s government announced plans to “cut red tape” from financial regulation to “turbocharge growth”. The finance ministry’s package of 30 planned reforms will review “burdensome” EU rules, as well as some that were introduced after the financial crisis—including one that requires banks and insurers to keep track of staff responsible for specific activities, making it easier for regulators to punish offenders if things go wrong.

Football World Cup: Penalty shoot-outs saw Brazil, the tournament favourites, lose to underdogs Croatia and the Netherlands lose to Argentina. Brazil’s elimination was the latest in a series of surprise results in Qatar, which has had more upsets than any World Cup since 2002. Croatia, a country of around 4m people, reached the semi-finals for a second consecutive tournament.

Word of the week: Reichsbürger, a German far-right extremist group that rejects the legitimacy of the federal republic in favour of the German Reich of 1871. Read the full story here.

Russia’s quixotic campaign for Bakhmut

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Bakhmut, in Donetsk province, has become the unlikely crux of the war in Ukraine. Russia is throwing most of its remaining offensive power at the small town, beyond which lie the bigger cities of Slovyansk and Kramatorsk. Yet the campaign is largely pointless: even if Russia were to succeed, it lacks the manpower to breach farther into Ukrainian territory.

The battle has turned into a test for Yevgeny Prigozhin, the ambitious founder of the Wagner Group, a firm of private mercenaries. Mr Prigozhin wants to show Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, that the well-equipped Wagner forces can succeed where the regular army has failed. In recent days Russia has captured some villages to Bakhmut’s south. But the quixotic effort has come at eye-watering cost, with heavy casualties on both sides. On Thursday Ukraine said it had killed 340 Russian troops in the previous 24 hours alone, bringing the total claimed tally to 93,000 Russian deaths in nine months of war.

Giorgia Meloni’s cash battle

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Italy’s new right-wing prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, is heading for a row with the European Union over the mundane matter of cash. Brussels has long urged Italian governments to lower the permitted ceiling for cash transactions, to encourage digital payments and to reduce tax evasion. Yet Ms Meloni’s draft budget for 2023 proposes to raise the ceiling from €1,000 ($1,056) to €5,000, and to scrap fines for retailers that decline card payments for transactions below €60.

Ms Meloni says she wants to help traders who are disadvantaged by a low cash ceiling or by having to pay commissions to credit-card providers. She rejects claims that more use of cash just facilitates tax evasion. But critics, including Italy’s central bank, insist that a higher ceiling will merely boost Italy’s already large black economy. Italians use credit and debit cards less than most other EU nationals. Ms Meloni’s new encouragement for cash augurs ill for her commitment to broader liberalising reforms.

Applying AI to detect pneumonia

PHOTO: PMC
Of all of the preventable diseases, pneumonia is responsible for some of the most shameful statistics. It kills thousands of children a day, most of them in poor countries, for want of timely diagnosis and treatment. And with life-saving kit like X-ray machines in short supply, alternative diagnostics are sorely needed. One potential alternative was reported on Monday at the 183rd meeting of the Acoustical Society of America: artificial intelligence (AI) that can tell whether someone has pneumonia from the sound of their coughing.

The AI algorithm “listens” to coughs and conducts acoustical analysis of the sound waves, diagnosing pneumonia with 97.5% accuracy. Its developers taught the algorithm to work in any room, with various levels of background noise. This is crucial because it means the tool can be used in people’s homes; one firm already has plans to develop such an application. The next time you are asked to “turn your head and cough”, it may be by an algorithm.

Brendan Fraser resurfaces in “The Whale”

PHOTO: LANDMARK
Next year’s Oscar nominations aren’t announced until January 24th, but it would be surprising if Brendan Fraser is not on the Best Actor shortlist. Once an A-list star whose credits include “The Mummy” and “Crash”, Mr Fraser drifted away from Hollywood lead roles and into depression. His new film, released in America on December 9th, is quite a comeback.

A melodramatic chamber piece directed by Darren Aronofsky (“The Wrestler”, “Mother!”), “The Whale” features Mr Fraser as a morbidly obese English teacher who is desperate to reconcile with his estranged 17-year-old daughter (Sadie Sink). Some critics have accused it of dehumanising overweight people: Mr Fraser is encased in prosthetic make-up, and Samuel D. Hunter’s screenplay, adapted from his own stage play, is corny and contrived. But Mr Fraser’s soulful performance earned him a six-minute standing ovation when “The Whale” premiered at the Venice Film Festival in September. His return is heartening, even if the film isn’t.

Weekend profile: Itamar Ben-Gvir, Israel’s likely new national security minister

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
At age 19, Itamar Ben-Gvir was Israel’s most toxic political activist. He had been the leader of the youth wing of the far-right, anti-Arab Kach party when the Israeli government designated it a terrorist organisation in 1994. A year later he was tainted by the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. He had no part in the murder, by a Jewish extremist furious about Rabin’s attempts to compromise with the Palestinians. But weeks earlier Mr Ben-Gvir had vandalised the prime minister’s car and boasted on television that “we got to his car, we’ll get to him too.”

Now aged 46, Mr Ben-Gvir will soon be made national security minister in the incoming government of Binyamin Netanyahu. He was once considered too dangerous to be conscripted into the army; now he will lead Israel’s police, which previously investigated him for inciting violence. To many, his rehabilitation symbolises the hard-right turn of Israeli politics.

Mr Ben-Gvir’s mission has been to make palatable a movement regarded by nearly all Israelis as beyond the pale. Raised in an affluent suburb near Jerusalem, he moved to a Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank. He opened a law practice that specialised in representing radical Jews accused of anti-Arab terrorism. He joined another party, Jewish Power, on a platform softened just enough to comply with rules prohibiting political parties from inciting racism. After years of leading groups of thugs in the streets of Jerusalem crying “Death to the Arabs!” he began correcting them to shout “Death to the terrorists!” instead.

But the rebranding wasn’t enough: in 2020 the party received only 19,000 votes. Its salvation came from Mr Netanyahu, who in his quest for a right-wing majority pressured Jewish Power to merge its candidate list with those of two other far-right parties. The new “Religious Zionism” list, which Mr Ben-Gvir co-leads, won 14 seats at the election in November, making it a critical part of Mr Netanyahu’s coalition.

Mr Ben-Gvir is trying to project a more moderate image, promising that as security minister “we will make sure law-abiding Arabs are secure as well”. But his election-night message revealed his long-held beliefs: “It’s time for us to return to being the landlords of our country.”

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down A sour, headless catfish cooked around Lesotho (5, 6)

1 across Hair as arranged according to religious rules (6)

2 across Cassette has hidden benefit (5)

3 across Shelter is variable in a run-down neighbourhood (6)

Factual clues

1 down Home of an odd saga involving cash inside a sofa (5, 6)

1 across What dictates women’s dress in Iran (6)

2 across A type of market that is unusually bloody right now (5)

3 across Something Britain is often hesitant to grant (6)


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Martin Kocurek, Bratislava, Slovakia
Sarah Forney, Pittsburgh, America
Arun K. Gurjale, Hosur, India

They all gave the correct answers of Mirage, New York-New York, Luxor, The Twelve Caesars, Sahara. The theme is Las Vegas casinos: The Mirage, New York, New York, Luxor, Caesars Palace and SAHARA.

If I have a thousand ideas and only one turns out to be good, I am satisfied

Alfred Nobel
