The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 13, 2023

America’s attorney-general named a special counsel to investigate how classified documents from Joe Biden’s tenure as vice-president during the Obama administration remained in his private possession. Two batches of documents have been discovered, at Mr Biden’s think-tank and in the garage of his Delaware home. Congressional Republicans, seeking to divert attention from Donald Trump’s documents scandal, an investigation with its own special prosecutor, have promised their own inquiry.

Consumer prices in America fell by 0.1% in December, the first monthly decline since May 2020. The drop is attributable to a reduction in the price of fuel and lower consumer demand. Annual inflation to December remains at 6.5%, higher than the Federal Reserve’s 2% target, but well below a peak of 9.1% in June.

Argentina was less fortunate—in December its annual inflation rate hit 95%, a three-decade high. Prices rose by 5.1% from the previous month. Last year only Zimbabwe, Lebanon, Venezuela, Syria and Sudan saw higher inflation, all in the triple digits. In 1989, when Argentina endured a bout of severe hyperinflation, prices rocketed by more than 3,000%.

Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co, one of the world’s largest chipmakers, reported a record quarterly profit of NT$295.9bn ($9.4bn)—a 78% rise. Strong demand for high-performance chips for 5G infrastructure and gadgets meant that TSMC bucked the trend of collapsing profits for technology firms.

Benin’s main opposition party, Les Democrates, rejected the results of last week’s election, accusing supporters of Patrice Talon, Benin’s president, of “flagrant” cheating. Parties allied with Mr Talon won 81 out of 109 seats, with Les Democrates winning the remainder. Once a pioneer of African democracy, Benin has moved towards one-party rule in recent years. No opposition candidates were permitted to run in the previous parliamentary election in 2019.

Russia released Taylor Dudley, an American navy veteran whom it detained after he entered the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad in April. Mr Dudley is the second American citizen freed from Russian prisons in just over a month. Meanwhile, 500 Ukrainian civilians remain trapped in Soledar, a town in eastern Ukraine that is being fiercely fought over, according to local officials.

Georg Gänswein, a catholic archbishop and friend to the late Pope Benedict XVI, released his long-awaited memoir. In “Nothing But the Truth: My Life Beside Pope Benedict XVI” Archbishop Gänswein, nicknamed “Gorgeous George”, makes public the tense relationship between Pope Benedict and his successor Pope Francis. During an interview, Archbishop Gänswein said Pope Francis’s restrictions on Latin Mass “pained Benedict's heart”.

Fact of the day: 40%, the percentage of elephant deaths that were the result of poaching in 2021, according to Monitoring the Illegal Killing of Elephants, a conservation programme. Read the full story.

America and Japan buddy up in defence

PHOTO: AP
On Friday Kishida Fumio, Japan’s prime minister, visits the White House. His meeting with Joe Biden bookends a whirlwind tour of countries, including France, Italy, Britain and Canada, as Japan prepares to host a G7 summit in Hiroshima in May. In Washington, climate and trade issues, especially American curbs on semiconductor exports to China, will be on the agenda. But the two leaders will also focus on security. On Wednesday their governments announced a commitment to strengthen their bilateral security alliance, faced with an increasingly assertive China.

This move comes at a time of upheaval for Japan’s security policy. Under a plan released in December, the country will nearly double its defence spending and acquire new weapons systems, including long-range missiles. The Biden administration has praised the initiative, seeing Japan’s build-up as essential to deterring Chinese aggression. And thus a means to ensure the security of the Indo-Pacific.

The calm before the storm for America’s banks

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On the surface, the ripples look calm enough. Four of America’s biggest lenders—Bank of America, Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo—will report fourth-quarter and full-year earnings on Friday. The expectation is that they, along with Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley who report next week, will make a similar level of profit as they did in the second or third quarters of 2022.

Yet those gentle undulations hide a frantic churn in bank-business revenues. Net interest income—the money banks collect on loans, less the money they pay out on deposits—is soaring as the Federal Reserve raises interest rates. Meanwhile, the risk of a slowing economy may force borrowers to default, so banks are setting aside loan-loss provisions. The shock of much higher interest rates has killed off dealmaking activity, while leading to banner years for trading desks. These pressures are expected to balance out for now. But choppier waters may lie ahead.

How to change Indian palates

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
For Hindus, the middle of January is an auspicious time. Makar Sankranti, a festival that marks the end of the winter solstice—known as “Pongal” in south India—falls this weekend. For millions of Indian farmers it is an occasion to celebrate harvests past while praying for more bountiful ones to come.

Rice and wheat are India’s traditional staples. But India’s government is hoping to change that. It pushed the UN to declare 2023 the International Year of Millets. At home, it is organising events to increase consumption and production of cereals.

Their reasoning is sound. Millets, a name given to a range of small-grained cereals, require far less water than rice and wheat. They also provide more protein and fibre. Yet they remain largely unfashionable with the Indian population. Per-person consumption of millets has fallen in recent decades, as urbanisation changed consumer tastes. The government may struggle to convert Indian palates.

Germany weathers the economic storm

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Friday Germany’s statistics agency will publish GDP growth figures for 2022. Analysts expect the number to hover around 1.6%. Last year was one of the most difficult for the German economy in recent history. Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine radically reduced Russian deliveries of natural gas to Germany; in 2021 Russia accounted for over half of German gas imports. A rapid increase in energy prices, as well as post-pandemic challenges like supply-chain bottlenecks, posed a serious threat to Germany’s manufacturing-heavy economic model.

Yet so far the economy has weathered the storm. German GDP rose by 0.4% between July and September last year. That followed increases of 0.8% and 0.1% in the first and second quarters respectively. Even so, first-quarter GDP figures for 2023 will probably show that Germany has fallen into recession, defined as two consecutive quarters of negative growth. But it is expected to be mild, as is the downturn in the rest of the euro zone.


A new film tackles race and gender in France

PHOTO: AP
“Saint Omer”, France’s entry for this year’s Oscars, is released in America on Friday. To describe it simply as a courtroom drama is to overlook the subtle study of motherhood, race, separation and belonging at the centre of this first feature film by Alice Diop, a French director born to Senegalese parents in the suburbs of Paris.

The movie follows the trial of Laurence Coly (Guslagie Malanda), a Senegalese woman studying in Paris. She admits to leaving her baby daughter on a beach in northern France to be carried away by the tide and is accused of murder. The story unfolds through the eyes of Rama (Kayije Kagame), a writer whose parents also come from Senegal. The trial awakens in Rama the pain of her own maternal relationship as well as her bi-cultural anxiety, peeling back layers of racial and cultural prejudice.

Ms Diop has already won gongs at the Venice Film Festival for “Saint Omer”, which is based on a true story. It is an artful account of the immigrant experience in France. And of motherhood everywhere.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Friday: Which voracious bird is the national bird of Romania, the state bird of Louisiana and also has a publishing imprint named after it?

Thursday: What profession links Saruman, Severus Snape and Oz the Great and Powerful?

The winners of last week’s crossword

Thank you to everyone who took part in our new weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Corien Kershey, Ottawa, Canada

Bernt Arne Odegaard, Fitjar, Norway

Ramon Azpurua, Caracas, Venezuela

They all gave the correct answers of Pope Benedict, Poland, enemy and Toyota. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.

All art is the struggle to be, in a particular sort of way, virtuous.

Iris Murdoch
