The world in brief
August 25, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Donald Trump surrendered to authorities at a jail in Atlanta, Georgia. He was booked on 13 state felony charges in connection with his effort to overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election. (Mr Trump denies wrongdoing.) He had a mugshot taken (his first) and was fingerprinted, then left the jail to return to New Jersey. In this indictment—his fourth in five months—he was charged alongside 18 co-defendants. At least 10 have turned themselves in so far; the others must do so by Friday at midday.

Vladimir Putin sent “condolences” to the families of the ten people killed in a private-jet crash outside Moscow on Wednesday. They included Yevgeny Prigozhin, head of the mercenary Wagner Group. In a televised speech Mr Putin said Mr Prigozhin was a “talented businessman” and that the crash would be investigated. Some western officials think an explosion aboard the plane may be responsible, according to reports. Mr Prigozhin led an aborted mutiny in June, and was then swiftly exiled to Belarus. On Monday, he released his first video in months, seemingly from somewhere in Africa. Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said his country was “not involved”.

The BRICS said that six new countries—Argentina, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, Saudi Arabia and the UAE—would join the bloc at the beginning of 2024. Cyril Ramaphosa, South Africa’s president, hailed the “first phase of the expansion process” for the group, which held its 15th summit this week in Johannesburg. More than 40 countries have expressed interest in joining, according to South African officials.

Norway said it will provide Ukraine with F-16s, making it the third country to do so, after Denmark and the Netherlands. After a meeting with Mr Zelensky on Thursday, Jonas Gahr Stoere, Norway’s prime minister, said that he would also provide the country with anti-aircraft missiles. Ukraine has been asking for the fighter jets since the beginning of the war in February 2022.

Turkey’s central bank raised interest rates by 7.5 percentage points to 25%, significantly more than expected. Hafize Gaye Erkan has hiked rates, which were at 8.5%, three times since she became the bank’s governor in June—a departure from the unconventional economics of Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president. But the country’s annual inflation is still hovering at around 48%.

America’s Department of Justice sued SpaceX, Elon Musk’s space company, for allegedly failing to “fairly consider or hire” asylum seekers and refugees because of their citizenship status. In public statements made between 2018 and 2022 the firm “wrongly claimed” that it could only hire lawful permanent residents. The DoJ hopes to win “fair consideration” for those denied employment. SpaceX did not immediately comment.

China announced an immediate ban on all seafood imports from Japan after Japanese officials began releasing treated radioactive water from the Fukushima nuclear plant into the Pacific ocean. Chinese customs officials said they were “highly concerned about the risk of radioactive contamination”. The International Atomic Energy Agency says there is no such risk. China is the biggest market for Japanese seafood exports.

Figure of the day: 100,000, the number of IT professionals that left Russia in 2022, according to a Kremlin official. Read the full story.


PHOTO: IMAGO
Europe’s new digital law
From Friday online platforms with more than 45m users—from Amazon, the world’s largest online retailer, to TikTok, a social-media platform—will have to comply with the Digital Services Act, the European Union’s ambitious new law. Its requirements include quickly removing illegal content and giving users an easy way to complain. The act will also ban targeted advertisements based on sensitive personal data such as religion or sexual preference. Fines for violations will be steep: up to 6% of a company’s global annual revenue.

Yet it is unclear that the DSA will improve online life. The European Commission, the EU’s executive arm, might not have the manpower needed to enforce it, and companies are likely to challenge its decisions in court. The General Data Protection Regulation, a major digital law that became effective in the EU in 2018, became an international standard. The DSA may lack the same global impact. Companies will be loth to relinquish control over their digital empires worldwide.


PHOTO: AP
Jerome does Jackson Hole
As central bankers and economists gather for the Federal Reserve’s annual conference in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, all eyes will be on Jerome Powell. The chairman of the world’s most powerful central bank will share his outlook for inflation and the economy in a much-anticipated speech on Friday. Last year his message was bracing, emphasising that tighter monetary policy was necessary to rein in inflation—even at the cost of economic pain. Global stockmarkets fell just over 3% in the days following his comments.

This time the economic backdrop looks sunnier. Inflation is declining, though still high. Investors already expect the Fed to keep rates elevated well into next year, meaning that Mr Powell need not persuade them of his seriousness. Some analysts think he may opine on whether rates will remain high over the long term, but that would risk triggering another market sell-off. The safer bet is to err on the side of blandness.


PHOTO: EPA
How optimistic are Britons?
Britain’s consumer confidence for August will be published by GFK, a market-research company, on Friday. They plummeted in July as consumers—beset by high prices and the rising borrowing costs—became gloomier about their personal finances and the future health of the economy. It was the first drop in the sentiment indicator since the start of 2023.

Since June the headline indicators of inflation have fallen, as have market-based expectations of further interest-rate rises. Many mortgage lenders have cut the rates they charge for new loans. Both may provide some relief.

But economic surveys also point to a decline in the rate of growth. The flash purchasing managers’ indices, published by S&P Global, a research firm, on Wednesday, suggested that Britain’s private sector was set to shrink in the third quarter of the year. Consumer confidence may remain in the doldrums for a while yet.



PHOTO: ALAMY
The decline of Mandarin
Ten years ago there was a growing interest in Mandarin, as China’s influence and economic heft increased. Now Mandarin-learning is declining in many Western countries. In America, enrolment in university Mandarin courses fell by 21% between 2016 and 2020.

That may be because job markets have changed. Translation tools like ChatGPT mean low-level Mandarin skills are not needed anymore. Bilingual Chinese graduates fill most roles that require a higher proficiency. But Western students may also be put off by China’s government, which has become more oppressive in the past decade, making living in or working with China seem less appealing.

This shows that China’s soft power is weak. But it is also a problem for Western governments, many of which say they need more Mandarin speakers. The CIA, for example, wants to double the number of Mandarin-speakers it employs. As China and its rivals struggle to get along, there is an ever greater need for mutual understanding. Being able to talk to each other might help.


PHOTO: SONY PICTURES
“Gran Turismo” lacks drive
In 2011 Jann Mardenborough, a 19-year-old from Cardiff, Wales, won a contest to find the world’s best player of “Gran Turismo”, Sony’s racing-simulator. His prize was the chance to compete as a racing driver in the real world.

Mr Mardenborough’s stranger-than-fiction story is told in a new film—also called “Gran Turismo”, and also from Sony—which opens in American cinemas on Friday. Film adaptations of games have a poor record, but things are changing. Sega’s “Sonic the Hedgehog 2” and Sony’s “Uncharted” were among last year’s highest-grossing films. “Gran Turismo” hopes to beat them.

Its transition from game to film is not handled smoothly, however. More sophisticated games make better material for film adaptation: in “Gran Turismo”, the narrative speeds ahead with little time for character development. There is no sense of the danger of hurtling around an actual track. The film is interesting for what it says about the future of media. But its filmmakers are unlikely to be spraying champagne from a winner’s podium.


The winners of last week’s crossword
Thank you to everyone who took part in our weekly crossword, published in the weekend edition of Espresso. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Ron George, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada

Apple Schubert, Munich, Germany

Tim Hagan, Honolulu, Hawaii, America

They all gave the correct answers of wriggle room, WeChat, lunar and mullet. Check back tomorrow for this week’s crossword.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: Under what nickname was Geri Halliwell better known?

Thursday: Which architect, renowned for his brutalist style, designed Coventry Cathedral?

Failure is the condiment that gives success its flavour.

Truman Capote
