The world in brief
July 15, 2023 
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

JPMorgan Chase reported a 67% surge in profits for its second quarter. Earnings hit $4.75 per share, up from $2.56 a year earlier. The American banking giant benefited from higher interest rates that propped up its lending business, as well as its recent acquisition of First Republic Bank, a regional lender. Shares of the bank climbed on the announcement.

America’s House of Representatives passed an annual defence bill, authorising a record $886bn in spending for the Pentagon. The National Defence Authorisation Act, which usually garners bipartisan support, was narrowly approved by 219 votes to 210. Most Democrats opposed the bill after hard-right Republicans added a series of culture-war amendments on Thursday, including one that would limit abortion access for military personnel.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, said that President Vladimir Putin agreed that a deal allowing the Black Sea export of grain from Ukraine should be extended past its current deadline of June 17th. On Thursday Russia threatened to withdraw if its own demands are not met and has not yet confirmed renewal. The agreement was initially brokered in July 2022, after Russia blockaded Ukrainian ports.

Belarus’s defence ministry said that fighters from Wagner group had arrived in the country and are training its soldiers. After their short-lived mutiny in June, members of the Russian mercenary outfit were given the option to relocate to Belarus. Earlier President Vladimir Putin reportedly claimed that he had also offered Wagner fighters the chance to continue fighting in Ukraine, but under a different commander.

Emmerson Mnangagwa, Zimbabwe’s thuggish president, approved severe punishments for anyone who criticises the country and, by extension, his authority, under the guise of protecting national sovereignty. Citizens will be banned from demeaning Zimbabwe in front of foreigners, among other offences. Scofflaws could be stripped of citizenship, or go to jail. Mr Mnangagwa faces elections in August.

A Russian national accused of conspiring to smuggle semiconductors and American-made ammunition into Russia was extradited to America from Estonia, where he was arrested in December. Vadim Konoshchenok, a suspected Russian spy, was arraigned in Brooklyn. A day earlier President Joe Biden said he was “serious” about brokering a prisoner exchange with Russia, which detained Evan Gershkovich, an American reporter, in March.

The British Library used imaging technology to read hundreds of censored pages of William Camden’s Annals, the first official account of the reign of Elizabeth I. According to a curator at the library, the findings suggest that the 400-year-old text had been heavily altered to appease her successor, James I.

Word of the week: Narcas, the word used to refer to the women that traffic drugs in Latin America’s cartels. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Fundraising heats up for America’s election
Michael Bloomberg’s ill-fated presidential campaign in 2020 cost more than $1bn. The splurge worked out at around $17m for each delegate he won in the Democratic primary. Vast sums of money are useful in American elections—but they are not decisive.

That, at least, is what candidates with the least cash will tell themselves on Saturday, when presidential hopefuls report their fundraising hauls between April and June. The pressure is on for Republicans, who need 40,000 individual donors to qualify for next month’s opening debate. Some campaigns have published some numbers: Donald Trump has raised $35m (some of which will go towards his legal fees); Ron DeSantis has raked in $20m since late May.

On Friday Joe Biden’s camp, with the Democratic National Committee, announced a $72m haul for the same period, surpassing Mr Trump. And with a bare-bones operation—Mr Biden has so far reportedly hired fewer than 20 campaign aides—his expenses are low. Still, the figure trails those reported by his predecessors, Barack Obama and Mr Trump, when they were running for second terms.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Billionaires’ summer camp winds up
Attendees at this year’s Sun Valley business gathering will get back on their jets on Saturday, as the annual shindig winds up. Tech and media moguls descend on the Idaho resort every summer to chinwag, in a jamboree organised by Allen & Company, an investment bank. This year’s guests included Satya Nadella of Microsoft, Tim Cook of Apple and Bob Iger of Disney.

The campers had plenty to talk about, from artificial intelligence to the impact of war in Ukraine. But the deals for which Sun Valley is known have probably not been flowing as freely as in past years. High interest rates and inflation have put a dampener on merger-making. Profits in medialand are down, as consumers and advertisers tighten their belts. Still, don’t expect many of those return flights to be economy.


PHOTO: MARIA PRYMACHENKO/SAATCHI GALLER
Ukrainian folk art brightens London
In February 2022, on the fourth day of the war in Ukraine, Russian shelling set fire to a small museum housing some of the works of Maria Prymachenko, a beloved folk artist who died in 1997. Despite the best efforts of locals to recover the art from the blaze, around 25 of her works were destroyed.

In an exhibition which opened this week in London, the Saatchi gallery is showing 23 of her works—which have been preserved by Prymachenko’s family—for the first time. Originally conceived as illustrations for a children’s book, they are bright and cheerful. Some are magical depictions of hybrid beasts. Others are biographical, depicting her life grazing geese and herding horses in the village of Bolotnya, in the Kyiv region.

In life, Prymachenko rarely left Bolotnya. Since the start of the war, her work has been reproduced and reimagined far beyond its borders. Far from dimming her legacy, Russian forces only succeeded in doing the opposite.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Driving cancer cells to commit suicide
To fight cancer, medicine has devised myriad ways to drug, irradiate, poison and cut out tumours. The problem with all these assaults is collateral damage: what kills cancer cells also kills healthy ones. In a first, scientists reporting in the journal Theranostics encoded a bacterial toxin into mRNA to hijack cancer cells and force them to kill themselves.

Echoing covid-19 vaccines, the injections delivered mRNA directly to cancer cells—except the toxin, rather than covid’s spike protein, was encoded into the mRNA’s molecules. These particles were injected into melanoma tumours in mice, where the code hacked into the cancer’s genes and forced them to produce the toxin—like “a Trojan horse”, as one researcher put it. After one injection, the tumours shrank significantly as they underwent programmed cell death. The mice were otherwise unaffected. This strategy, if replicable in humans, would be an elegant addition to the oncologist’s arsenal.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Pita Limjaroenrat, Thai reformer
No one had expected him to win. In the lead up to Thailand’s general election in May, Pita Limjaroenrat’s political party, Move Forward, was considered a bit player, popular among young, liberal activists. But after campaigning on a promise to reform the monarchy and military, two institutions that have long dominated the country of 71m people, Mr Pita’s party won the most seats of any party. The results signalled that a growing majority of Thais are fed up with the military establishment’s control. Instead, they want a fully democratic country led by the 42-year-old Mr Pita.

The first-born scion of a Thai-Chinese agribusiness family, Mr Pita was sent to New Zealand for high school. He studied at Harvard and MIT, then worked at the Boston Consulting Group, Thailand’s Ministry of Commerce and as an executive at Grab, South-East Asia’s answer to Uber. But politics, on some level, always intrigued him. Growing up, he listened to New Zealand’s parliamentary debates while doing his homework (admittedly there were limited channels). At Harvard, he shadowed American classmates who were campaigning for Barack Obama.

Mr Pita ran on a platform of dismantling business monopolies, boosting economic growth beyond the capital city of Bangkok and amending the law that criminalises criticism of the monarchy. This revision of the lèse-majesté law makes most other political parties nervous. Discussion of this topic is taboo in Thailand; disparaging the king can lead to 15 years in prison.

Despite his popularity, Mr Pita’s hopes of becoming prime minister are fading. On July 13th he failed to win enough votes in parliament to become the country’s leader. Only 13 of 250 senators (the upper house is appointed by the army) backed him. The military establishment also controls the electoral commission, constitutional court and anti-corruption commission. Two complaints, one submitted by an activist lawyer and the other by a conservative politician, are before the constitutional court: one about Move Forward’s plan to amend the lèse-majesté law and another over specious allegations that Mr Pita failed to adequately declare his ownership of shares in a media firm.

Parliament will reconvene on July 19th for another vote. If the senate continues to ignore the will of the people, protests may sweep the country.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Chaperone not prepared for age of man (12)

1 across Gangster helps spook even in beleaguered city (6)

2 across Deep waters in which nothing can absorb energy (5)

3 across In several countries logo, mostly unknown, conveys remembrance (6)

Factual clues
1 down What the sediment of a Canadian lake might serve as a marker of (12)

1 across Where Bashar al-Assad wants Americans to help rebuild synagogues (6)

2 across What China says Japan is treating like a sewer (5)

3 across What one might hear at a funeral—or in a Bruce Springsteen song (6)



This week’s quiz winners
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Cindy Fagnoni, Arlington, Virginia, America

Gerard Kelly, Dungarvan, Ireland

Prashant Mathur, Gurugram, India

They all gave the correct answers of Taxi, aviator sunglasses, New York, mean and Ragin’ Cajun. The theme is Martin Scorsese films: Taxi Driver, The Aviator, New York, New York (or Gangs of New York), Mean Streets and Raging Bull.

The questions were:

Monday: Which US sitcom, which aired in the late 1970s and early 1980s, starred Danny DeVito, Judd Hirsch and Andy Kaufman?
Tuesday: What is the nickname for the large, slightly convex, eyewear worn by Tom Cruise in “Top Gun”?
Wednesday: Columbia and Cornell universities can be found in which US state?
Thursday: What is the statistical term for the arithmetic or geometric average of a group of numbers?
Friday: What is the nickname of James Carville, a strategist in Bill Clinton’s 1992 Presidential campaign?

Knowledge is of no value unless you put it into practice.

Anton Chekhov
