The world in brief
September 16, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Authorities in Libya restricted access to the port city of Derna to aid rescue teams in their search for flood survivors. At least 10,000 people are still missing or presumed dead after flooding from Storm Daniel burst two dams and swept through the city on Sunday night. The current death toll is over 11,000 and is expected to rise. There are fears that contamination of water could take more lives still. The city has already buried thousands of its dead, mainly in mass graves.

The EU fined TikTok €345m ($368m) for improperly handling the data of young users. Ireland’s Data Protection Commission—which has authority over TikTok because the firm’s European headquarters is there—said the Chinese social media company violated data protection law by making the profiles of users aged between 13 and 17 public by default. It gave TikTok three months to comply with EU law.

Joe Biden sent two top aides to Detroit to help resolve America’s biggest strike in decades. Nearly 13,000 workers at Ford, General Motors and Stellantis are striking at three plants after failing to reach a pay deal. The United Auto Workers union is seeking a 40% pay rise; the companies have offered up to 20%. Mr Biden said he understood “workers’ frustration”.

The European Commission ended import bans on grain from Ukraine to neighbouring countries. The measure was introduced in May following concerns that an influx of Ukrainian produce had driven down local prices and decreased farmers’ incomes, but the Commission said such “market distortions” have disappeared. In response, Poland, Hungary and Slovakia announced that they will maintain curbs of their own.

Russia’s central bank raised its benchmark interest rate by a percentage point to 13%, as it tries to bring down inflation. The bank had previously been lowering interest rates, which peaked at 20% in February 2022 after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. But inflationary pressure due to strong domestic demand and a sinking rouble has forced the bank to raise rates three times since July.

Apple said it would release a software update for iPhone 12 users in France to potentially end a dispute over radiation levels that led to the phone’s sales being banned there. French regulators ordered businesses to stop selling the phone after they found it breached radiation limits. Apple contests this claim. On Thursday, Belgium also said that it was reviewing the model for health risks.

Ukraine said that its armed forces had captured Andrivka, a village south of Bakhmut, the town which Russia seized in May after months of gruelling effort. Many of Ukraine’s most experienced brigades are fighting around Bakhmut, which has more symbolic than strategic importance. Ukraine’s counter-offensive has made limited progress there since beginning in June, although it has sped up in recent weeks.

Word of the week: rezidentura, a Russian term for a base of operations, often an embassy, used for spying in another country. Read the full story.


PHOTO: EPA
Preparing NATO for war
NATO’s most senior commanders meet in Oslo this weekend for the annual Military Committee Conference. They will advance plans made during the alliance’s Vilnius summit in July on how to deter and defend against adversaries, including Russia. To do so the alliance says it needs to get “more troops on higher readiness”, adapt command structures and confirm that key logistics hubs and pre-positioned stocks are in place.

Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine has created a sense of urgency. Next year NATO plans to carry out its largest military exercise since the cold war, across Germany, Poland and the Baltics. It will involve some 41,000 troops, more than 50 ships and up to 700 air combat sorties. It is further indication that NATO once again sees itself as an alliance that must be ready for war.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Iran, one year on from the death of Mahsa Amini
Saturday marks one year since the death of Mahsa Amini, a young Iranian woman detained for showing her hair. She was allegedly beaten while in custody. Her death sparked months of protests against Iran’s clerical regime, which were ruthlessly repressed. Women burned their headscarves in defiance of official strictures. One official said Iran would disband its religious police. Many Iranians hoped to see the end of their government.


Not for the first time, it endured the challenge. Violence and time quelled the protests. Parliament wants to bring back the morality squad. Still, there are lasting changes. Women continue to flout the official dress code. The regime’s legitimacy—not strong to begin with—has ebbed further. It seems to have given up on trying to appeal to the masses; instead it relies on a shrinking base of hardliners. There may not be big protests to mark the anniversary of Ms Amini’s death. But the anger it engendered lives on.


PHOTO: SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Scientists discover new “hybrid” brain cells
The human brain has been called the most complex object in the universe. But in some ways it is also simple, comprising just two main types of cell: neurons, which handle neurotransmission, and glia, which provide the brain’s infrastructure. Or so it was thought. Scientists have now discovered a third kind of brain cell that acts like a hybrid of the two. In a study recently published in Nature, a journal, they named them glutamatergic astrocytes.

Astrocytes are a type of glia and generally do not spread the sort of signal sent by neurons. But in the study, researchers found that some mouse astrocytes contained the right proteins for such signalling and secreted glutamate, a common neurotransmitter. Remarkably, when the researchers disrupted these astrocytes, the mice developed symptoms of epilepsy and Parkinson’s, and poorer recall. That suggests that glutamatergic astrocytes could open whole new lines of investigation for treating neurological disorders. The most complex object in the universe just got even more complex.


PHOTO: MATT WILSON/NETFLIX
Comic relief in South Africa
There is plenty to cry about in South Africa, which has the third-highest murder rate and the highest unemployment rate in the world. Yet in spite—and often because—of the woes, there is plenty to laugh about, too. And few comedians make South Africans chortle more than Trevor Noah, whose 12-show tour of the country closes on Saturday.

Mr Noah’s career began in the clubs of his home town, Johannesburg, before he became the host of “The Daily Show”, an American television programme. He symbolises the unifying role comedians can play in South Africa. Under apartheid, comedy was subject to heavy regulation. But opportunities for black stars have grown since it ended in 1994.

Languages other than English, known as “vernac”, have also found their way into jokes on stage. However the state of the country’s economy means only the privileged few can afford to experience a show live. It is a shame; many others could use a laugh.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Shikma Bressler, the unlikely face of Israel’s protests
Since Israel’s government revealed its judicial-overhaul plans in January, it has been on a collision course with the Supreme Court—and a particle physicist. Shikma Bressler has become the unlikely face of protests against the country’s far-right coalition government. This week, as the Supreme Court began discussing whether to strike down the government’s first reform aimed at shrinking the judiciary’s powers, thousands of demonstrators again took to the streets of Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.

Ms Bressler claims she never had any political ambitions. She normally works as a senior scientist at the Weizmann Institute of Science. There she leads a research group that deals in other collisions: bashing particles into each other at the Large Hadron Collider, at CERN in Switzerland, to understand the universe’s fundamental building blocks. She has said that she longs to return to everyday life in the lab.

Since March 2020, however, she has been in the political spotlight. At the time, Binyamin Netanyahu, the prime minister, was due to stand trial on corruption charges (which he denies). But his trial was postponed when the courts were shut as part of the first coronavirus lockdown. In response, Ms Bressler and two of her brothers founded the Black Flags, a pro-democracy protest movement that spread across the country. When Mr Netanyahu was relegated to the opposition after the 2021 election, the group disbanded—but within 18 months, “Bibi”, as he is known, was back in office.

His plans to limit the judiciary’s power spurred Ms Bressler to return to the megaphone. Shortly before the first legal step of that plan passed, which in July ended the Supreme Court’s ability to use “reasonableness” as grounds to overturn government decisions, she led 20,000 people on a five-day march from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. Among her concerns are the decision’s implications for women’s rights in Israel.

Her campaign has not been without missteps. Last week she likened parts of the coalition to “Nazis” for their views on Palestinians, which Mr Netanyahu was quick to condemn as “an insult to the Holocaust” and an “incitement to murder”. Ms Bressler, who is Jewish, later apologised on X (formerly Twitter). Many of her fellow protesters, though, seem unlikely to hold it against her; like Ms Bressler, they see these demonstrations as the battle of a generation.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Cryptic clues

1 down Ban demonstration in favour of replacing former lover (11)

1 across Develop odd zeal and slight paranoia after taking first choice of red or blue pill (6)

2 across Strapped-for-cash, dealer doesn’t close (5)

3 across Steal the Spanish coin (6)

Factual clues

1 down Something Brazil is considering ending for gambling (11)

1 across A drug first approved in America in 1987 (6)

2 across What more English councils risk becoming (5)

3 across A metal needed for battery cathodes in electric vehicles (6)

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.



The winners of last week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Mark Jarboe, Lawrence, Kansas, America

Tarja Ryynänen, Helsinki, Finland

Stephen Phillips, Perth, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of sperm, Beluga, pilot, Finn and Blue. The theme is whales: sperm whale, Beluga whale, pilot whale, fin whale and blue whale.

The questions were:

Monday: What is the common name for the male reproductive cell, or gamete?

Tuesday: What is the most expensive type of caviar?

Wednesday: What is the name for a mariner who guides ships into port?

Thursday: Which character was played by John Boyega in the later Star Wars films?

Friday: Which Joni Mitchell album is regularly voted by critics as one of the greatest of all time?

Some problems are so complex that you have to be highly intelligent and well informed just to be undecided about them.

Laurence Peter
