The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (23:51 GMT / 07:51 Hong Kong)

The race for a Senate seat in Georgia will go to a run-off next month, meaning that control of Congress’s upper chamber may not be known for weeks. To keep the Senate, Democrats need to win two of the three competitive seats yet to be called. (They are Arizona, Georgia and Nevada.) The House of Representatives looks likely to flip to the Republicans, but the “red wave” failed to materialise in America’s midterms. Separately, abortion-rights supporters scored victories in five states, most notably in conservative Kentucky.

Stockmarkets and crypto prices dropped after Binance, the world’s largest crypto exchange, withdrew from talks to save FTX, its floundering rival. Binance said a liquidity crunch at FTX was “beyond our control or ability to help” and abruptly withdrew a tentative purchase offer. The Wall Street Journal reported that FTX needs to cover $8bn in withdrawal requests. The S&P 500 shed 2.1%.

Russia’s defence minister and top general ordered troops to withdraw from the Ukrainian city of Kherson, the only regional capital Russia had captured since it invaded the country. Ukrainian forces have been making advances in Kherson province for months. On Wednesday troops pushed closer to the city; Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said there had been “intense fighting” on the frontline.

Meta, the parent company of Facebook, announced a plan to make 11,000 employees (13% of its workforce) redundant. The company’s value has dropped by 73% this year. In a letter to employees Mark Zuckerberg, the founder and chief executive, explained that revenue growth during the pandemic had not endured as he had expected. Meta will now focus on “growth areas” including its AI discovery engine, advertising and business platforms and the metaverse.

The European Commission proposed changing the EU’s fiscal rulebook to allow governments to individually negotiate their debt-reduction plans. Under current rules, countries are obliged to reduce excessive public debt at a standardised rate. If approved, the change could spare heavily indebted countries, like Italy, from unrealistic austerity measures. But less indebted countries, like Germany, worry that more flexibility will be exploited by spendthrift governments.

European Union negotiators agreed to a law setting stricter emissions-reduction targets for sectors not covered by the bloc’s emissions-trading system. The deal, struck late on Tuesday night, affects various industries including road transport and agriculture. Meanwhile in Egypt the first demonstrations took place at COP27, the UN’s climate summit, with activists calling for an end to funding for fossil fuels.

The International Monetary Fund provisionally agreed to a $4.5bn programme to support Bangladesh’s struggling economy. Bangladesh has seen rapid economic growth in recent years, but has been hit by soaring inflation and lower demand for its garment exports. It is the third country in South Asia to have reached such an agreement with the IMF this year, after Pakistan and Sri Lanka.

Fact of the day: $770m, the value of the human hair exported by India last year, twice as much as in 2020. Read the full story.

The Republican Party after the midterms

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As votes in America’s midterms continue to be counted, the Republicans look likely to narrowly win the House of Representatives. Control of the Senate may not be known for weeks, as the race in Georgia goes to a December run-off. The results were closer than expected. But a few portents stand out.

Republicans may have to temper their anti-abortion rhetoric. Voters chose to protect reproductive rights in a handful of states. Same for their denial of the 2020 election: many proponents of the “Big Lie” lost statewide races.

In Washington, a Republican-controlled House will do little legislating and hold more made-for-television hearings. Unless Democrats raise the debt ceiling in the lame-duck session, Republicans may try to hold America’s credit rating (and the global economy) hostage to force spending concessions. And a narrow Republican majority would give the party’s far-right flank relatively greater power, meaning headaches for Kevin McCarthy, the presumptive Speaker. The next few months promise political deadlock—back to familiar territory.

What the midterms mean for business

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Corporate America likes gridlock. So although the Republican Party did worse than expected in the midterms, assuming they take the House, business executives will not be moping. Divided government means no new corporation taxes or windfall levies from the Biden administration. It also means less public spending. That may help limit the rise in inflation—which data out on Thursday will probably show remained high, at about 8% annually in October. Thankfully for some industries, big spending bills on infrastructure, semiconductors and climate have already become law, meaning there is still plenty of money to feast upon.

America Inc will not be spared from heavy-handed government, though. The GOP will lack the strength in Congress to thwart the White House’s efforts to push regulation to the left. And while Washington, DC, is in legislative paralysis, state governments will flex their muscles. These are increasingly ideological strongholds, and growing bossier towards business. Red states attack corporate “wokeness” while blue states demand environmental purity. There are big chasms for the private sector to straddle.

Britain’s winter of discontent

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Thursday many commuters in London will once again struggle to get to work. Staff from London Underground, which runs the Tube network, plan to strike over pay and conditions. And around Britain, more industrial action is coming.

On Wednesday the Royal College of Nursing announced that its 300,000 members had voted for the union’s first ever national strike. Staff at 150 universities will walk out at the end of November. Teachers, midwives and ambulance workers are all mulling similar measures. Some rail strikes were suspended this week, but if unions’ negotiations with bosses fail, they could come back.

Unions’ chief demand is for pay rises to reflect inflation, which reached a 40-year high of 10% in September. The government, scrambling to patch up its finances, seems unlikely to comply with such demands. Britain is braced for a season of disruption.

A billion-dollar art auction

Founding Microsoft, with Bill Gates in 1975, made Paul Allen a billionaire many times over. Much of this fortune was spent on environmental, scientific and philanthropic endeavours. Some of it paid for yachts and sumptuous villas. And Allen, who died in 2018, also accumulated a particularly fine art collection. Mixing contemporary works with 19th-century masterpieces, among the treasures are a pointilliste painting by Georges Seurat, a landscape of Mont Sainte-Victoire by Paul Cézanne, a self-portrait by Francis Bacon and one of J.M.W. Turner’s finest vistas of the Redentore church in Venice.

Allen’s rationale for collecting was admiration rather than investment. “You have to be doing it because you just love the works,” he insisted. Nevertheless, on Wednesday and Thursday when 195 pieces of his collection go up for sale they are expected to make over $1bn. That would make the sale, at Christie’s in New York, the biggest single-owner art auction ever. And there is more than $500m-worth still in the vaults.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which rock star appeared with the word “slave” written on his face in protest at his recording contract?

Wednesday: Which boxer won the 1960 Olympic light-heavyweight title, in Rome, but was then refused service in a Kentucky restaurant when he returned to America?

Genius is the recovery of childhood at will.

Arthur Rimbaud
