The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 19, 2023

In a surprise announcement, Jacinda Ardern, New Zealand’s prime minister, said she would step down within the next three weeks. Ms Ardern was widely praised for her handling of the pandemic and for her response to a horrific terrorist attack on a Christchurch mosque in 2019. However her popularity has recently plummeted. In a tearful statement she said she did not have “enough in the tank” to continue leading the country. She was elected prime minister in 2017, aged just 37.

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, addressed the World Economic Forum in Davos, asking the West to supply more arms. Meanwhile, Germany said it would wait for America to send tanks to Ukraine before taking that step itself. Britain earlier pledged to send 14 Challenger tanks, and Poland and Finland said they are prepared to export German-made Leopard 2 tanks—though they await Berlin’s approval.

American stockmarkets sank on the news that retail sales in December fell by 1.1% from November, as shoppers tightened their belts amid rising interest rates and high inflation. The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped by 1.8% and the S&P 500 by 1.6%. Monetary tightening has sapped consumer confidence even though America’s labour market remains strong.

America’s treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, met China’s vice-premier and economic tsar, Liu He, for the first time, in Zurich. The American treasury said that the pair had a “candid” conversation, agreeing that better communication between their governments would be beneficial to the global economy. Before the meeting Ms Yellen remarked that their countries shared a responsibility to “manage our differences”.

Microsoft announced that it will cut 10,000 jobs, or around 5% of its global workforce. Redundancies will cost the firm around $1.2bn. Amazon will also cut 6% of its workforce by the end of Wednesday. Other tech firms have also reduced the size of their workforce in response to signs of a slowing economy.

American prosecutors charged a founder of Bitzlato, a crypto exchange registered in Hong Kong, with operating an illegal money-transmitting business. Anatoly Legkodymov, a Russian national living in China, was arrested in Miami. French authorities shut down the platform’s website and seized its cryptocurrency. Bitzlato allegedly helped launder $700m on behalf of criminals.

Israel’s Supreme Court ruled against the appointment of Aryeh Deri, a close ally of the prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, to a senior minister position. The court decried Mr Deri’s appointment as unreasonable given his previous conviction for tax fraud. The decision is a blow to Mr Netanyahu’s right-wing coalition and signals rising tensions between it and Israel’s independent judiciary.

Fact of the day: 65,000, the number of pregnant women in sub-Saharan Africa who die every year from blood loss. Read the full story.

America’s debt-ceiling madness

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Thursday the American government is expected to hit its “debt ceiling”—the upper limit on how much money it can borrow by issuing bonds. The ceiling, a political creation, can be lifted by a simple vote in Congress. That, however, will not happen anytime soon.

Republicans, newly in control of the House of Representatives, demand big cuts to federal spending, including to public-health insurance and other social programmes. The Democrats, who control the Senate, refuse.

For now the Treasury will use special-accounting tactics to ensure that it has money to cover all obligations, from social-insurance outlays to bond payments. Analysts believe these manoeuvres will last until the third quarter, which ends in June. As that deadline nears, global markets will be on edge about the possibility of an American default. Precedent suggests that Congress will reach a last-minute compromise. But given the clout of Republican hardliners, such as those who blocked the appointment of their speaker, the dangers of an accident loom far larger than in the past.

Erdogan’s pre-election spending

PHOTO: AP
Turkish central bankers are expected to keep interest rates unchanged at 9% when they meet on Thursday. Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president, is determined to keep the economy growing, and credit flowing, in order to help his chances in elections due to be held on May 14th.

Last year Mr Erdogan pressured the bank to slash interest rates from 14% to 9%. By October inflation had reached 85.5%, stinging the poor and lower-middle classes—Mr Erdogan’s core voters—the hardest. Inflation has since fallen, though only to 64.3%, and the president’s poll numbers are improving. Foreign reserves are being topped up with cash from Russia and Gulf states but the central bank is rapidly spending it to keep the depreciating lira afloat.

In December the government raised the minimum wage by 55%, its third large increase in 2022. It also in effect lowered the retirement age, allowing 2m extra Turks to claim their pensions. The opposition sees blatant bids for votes.

A new central station in Bangkok

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
South-East Asia’s largest train station is due to open on Thursday. Officially named Krung Thep Aphiwat (“glory of Bangkok”) Central Terminal, but known as Bang Sue Grand Central, the sleek, undulating terminus in the north of Thailand’s capital has 24 platforms and can handle 600,000 passengers a day.

Until recently Thailand’s railways were notorious for ancient diesel engines and derailments. Bangkok’s previous central station building was completed in 1916. The government hopes investment in its railways will pay off in boosts to tourism and reduced road congestion. The new station, which took over a decade to build and cost around $1bn, is part of an explosion of urban transport in Bangkok, as well as being a hub for national and international lines. Bang Sue will serve commuter, long-distance and, eventually, high-speed trains. It will also connect three airports and, later this decade, trains from Kunming in China will stop on route to Singapore.


Protests against French pension reform

PHOTO: REUTERS
France is braced for disruption on Thursday, after every union in the country called for a day of protests, marches and strikes against the government’s plan to raise the legal minimum pension age from 62 years to 64. Organisers hope to get 1m people out on the streets. Trains, metros, buses, airports and schools will all be affected.

Thanks to a long lifespan and a low average retirement age, the French spend longer in retirement than pensioners in almost any other OECD country. They are in no mood to give up this privilege. A poll suggests that two-thirds are against raising the pension age to 64.

President Emmanuel Macron will not be around to witness the disturbance, however. He is due at a summit in Barcelona, where France and Spain will sign a bilateral treaty to strengthen their friendship. Some of the ministers accompanying him stand ready to return to Paris early, should things get out of hand.

Ronaldo and Messi meet in Saudi Arabia

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
On Thursday Cristiano Ronaldo, a brilliant but fading Portuguese footballer, will play his first match in Saudi Arabia since moving there last year. Mr Ronaldo will captain players from his new club, Al-Nassr, in a friendly against Paris St-Germain. The French team includes his great rival, Lionel Messi, who led Argentina to victory in the World Cup in Qatar.

Mr Ronaldo and Mr Messi are both closely linked with football in the Gulf. PSG is owned by Qatar’s state investment fund, and Mr Messi is a “tourism ambassador” for Saudi Arabia (whose team beat Argentina in Qatar).

The Saudi government wants to host the World Cup, with Greece and Egypt, in 2030. But the choice of Qatar by football’s governing body was tarnished by corruption. The host had a record of abusing human rights and is so hot that the tournament was held in November and December. Saudi Arabia could pose some of the same problems. FIFA may decide that a different bid is an easier bet.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which right-wing pressure group was founded by Robert Welch junior in 1958?

Wednesday: Who was the leader of the migrating rabbit group in the novel Watership Down?

Children often have a much stronger concept of morality than adults.

Nina Bawden
