The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (22:50 GMT+1 / 05:50 Hong Kong)

Boris Johnson, Britain’s prime minister, was reportedly resisting demands for his resignation from several cabinet ministers gathered in Downing Street. They were said to include former loyalists such as Priti Patel, the home secretary, and Grant Shapps, the transport secretary. On Wednesday night Mr Johnson sacked Michael Gove, another senior minister, who had also told him to go, and Simon Hart, the Welsh secretary, resigned. Some ministers still support Mr Johnson. If he refuses to step down, more members of the government are likely to join the 38 who have resigned since Tuesday.

Pat Cipollone, a former White House counsel, agreed to a closed-door interview with the January 6th committee on Friday. Mr Cipollone is considered a key witness to Donald Trump’s attempts to overturn the 2020 election, as well as his handling of the Capitol insurrection. The interview represents a breakthrough for the committee, which subpoenaed Mr Cipollone last week.

Iranian state television reported that several foreigners, including a senior British diplomat stationed in Tehran, were charged with espionage by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, a branch of the army. They were reportedly accused of collecting soil samples in the desert in central Iran where missile tests were under way. Giles Whitaker, the British envoy, was said to have been expelled after apologising. Britain called the reports “completely false”.

Railway workers in France went on strike, demanding wage increases “at least equal to rising inflation”. Close to one-third of intercity and regional trains were cancelled, a day before France’s school summer holidays begin. The railway strike action follows a walkout by airline workers last week.

China imposed a covid-19 vaccine mandate for the first time. Starting next week, residents of Beijing will be required to show proof of vaccination to enter a range of public venues. This week China reported its first cases of the highly transmissible Omicron BA.5.2 subvariant in Beijing, the capital, and Xi’an, a city in central China.

Crypto broker Voyager Digital filed for bankruptcy, having suspended withdrawals, trading and deposits last week. The firm cited market volatility and the unexpected collapse of Three Arrows Capital, a now-bankrupt crypto hedge fund which had defaulted on a multimillion dollar loan to Voyager Digital.

More than 400 inmates of a prison in Abuja, Nigeria’s capital, remain at large after a raid on Tuesday night by militants suspected of belonging to Boko Haram, a jihadist group. Nearly 900 prisoners fled after the jailbreak, though many were recaptured or turned themselves in. An official at the interior ministry said the assailants “came specifically for their

Fact of the day: 54%, the share of abortions in America carried out through medication rather than surgery. Read the full story.

Indonesia and the G20

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The foreign ministers from the G20 group of countries gather in Bali on Thursday, at a time of unusually active diplomacy for their host, Indonesia. Joko Widodo, the president, known as Jokowi, recently visited both his Ukrainian and Russian counterparts on a “peace mission” intended to ease shortages in the global grain market.

Indonesia has made three worthy issues its priorities during its year in the G20’s rotating chair: “global health architecture” (ie, preparedness for future pandemics); “digital transformation” (notably of finance); and “sustainable energy transition”. But despite Jokowi’s efforts, the G20 meetings this year are bound to focus on the war in Ukraine.

In November Bali will host the G20 leaders. Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, will attend, and Jokowi has also invited Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, although Ukraine is not a member of the club. Even on the holiday island of Bali, it will be hard to avoid talking about the war.

Stand-off in Downing Street

PHOTO: AP
Britain’s government is in crisis. On July 6th Boris Johnson faced a wave of ministerial resignations, as his party finally decided it had had enough of the sleaze and mismanagement that have engulfed it for months. Most of his MPs appear determined that he should go. A delegation of Cabinet ministers urged him to quit; they were said to include such erstwhile loyalists as Priti Patel, the home secretary, and Nadhim Zahawi, whom Mr Johnson appointed as the new chancellor only on Tuesday.

Most of Mr Johnson’s predecessors would have recognised the political gravity, and stepped aside at this point. He is refusing, citing the mandate he drew from the general election in 2019. If he does not resign, his party will drag him out. The 1922 Committee of Conservative backbench MPs may organise a fresh no-confidence vote next week. He is unlikely to win.

Australia goes underwater again

PHOTO: AP
A low pressure system is wreaking havoc in New South Wales, Australia’s most populous state. It has dumped more rain on Sydney over four days than London gets in a year. At least one person has died and tens of thousands have been evacuated as rivers have broken their banks. Several towns are braced for flooding as the rain moves north from Sydney.

Flood-stricken Australians will be thrown a buoy on Thursday in the form of federal disaster payments. The new Labor government, led by Anthony Albanese, is offering handouts of A$1,000 ($680) to anyone whose home has been subsumed by rising waters. But that will not go far. And building back is getting harder. Floods are striking Australia with increasing ferocity; some low-lying parts of western Sydney have gone underwater four times in the past 18 months. As waters subside, residents face a difficult choice: leave, or prepare for yet more inundations.

Battle of the bulk: Costco’s sales

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Costco, a giant American supermarket chain, publishes its earnings report for June on Thursday, and its results will be scrutinised more closely than usual. Analysts have been poring over companies’ earnings for signs of a recession. Wealthy consumers are of particular interest, given their outsized impact: the top 20% of American households account for about 40% of consumer spending and 28% of GDP, says Morgan Stanley, a bank.

Costco provides a window into how rich Americans’ spending habits might change. The chain is popular with affluent shoppers who are alert to value but who also have the cash to buy in bulk. So far Costco’s sales have been resilient. Even as low-income shoppers have reduced spending, richer ones have sustained their appetite for giant tubs of pretzels; buying toilet paper in bulk can even act as a hedge against rising prices. The question is whether, or when, such lofty spending will succumb to gravity.

Extreme heat at the haj

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Thursday some 1m pilgrims will begin the annual haj to Mecca in Saudi Arabia, a religious ritual that every Muslim with financial and physical means is expected to complete at least once in their lifetime. It is the first time the Saudi government has allowed foreign pilgrims to participate since the start of the pandemic.

But bookings, allocated via lottery, have been chaotic. And those who make it to Mecca will face temperatures above 40°C, which can play havoc with the human body. As usual when the haj falls in summer (the dates rotate depending on the lunar calendar), the pilgrims will be sprayed with water and move through vast air-conditioned corridors. But climate models suggest that, if global temperatures rise by 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, lethal heat exposure during the haj will become five times more likely. A rise of 2°C increases the risks tenfold. The religious ritual is becoming increasingly perilous.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which city hosts the annual Nobel Prize awards?

Wednesday: Which country was the subject of three partitions in the late 18th century?

There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact.

Arthur Conan Doyle
