The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 8, 2023

Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, declared a three-month state of emergency in ten provinces affected by large earthquakes in the south of the country and neighbouring Syria. The quakes on Monday have already left at least 7,200 people dead. That number looks certain to rise; the World Health Organisation suggested that fatalities could reach 20,000. The initial quake’s epicentre was near the Turkish city of Gaziantep and had a magnitude of 7.8. A series of aftershocks followed.

Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands said Ukraine would receive at least 100 Leopard 1 tanks in the coming months. Germany has approved the export of up to 178. Separately, America approved the sale of weapons worth $10bn to Poland, including the HIMARS rocket launcher. Poland has ramped up its defences since Russia invaded its neighbour.

Microsoft unveiled an AI-enhanced version of its Bing search engine. It is powered by the same technology behind ChatGPT, a chatbot created by OpenAI, a Microsoft-backed startup, and only accommodates a limited number of queries at present. Microsoft’s AI investment represents an attempt to win market share in search from Google, which just announced its own AI-powered chatbot called Bard.

Jerome Powell, chair of America’s Federal Reserve, warned that interest rates may rise higher than markets have anticipated in order to restrain inflation. An unexpectedly strong jobs report last week, Mr Powell said during an event in Washington, “underscores the message” of caution. On Wednesday the Fed raised rates by a quarter of a percentage point.

Thousands attended the funeral prayers of Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan’s former president, in Karachi, a city in the south of the country. Mr Musharraf, who died on Sunday, led a coup in 1999 and went on to rule Pakistan for nearly a decade, first as “chief executive” then as president. He had lived in Dubai since 2016.

A British “digital pound” could be launched in the next decade according to the Treasury and the Bank of England. It would provide a state-backed alternative to potentially volatile digital currencies issued by private companies. A consultation on the idea begins on Tuesday, but a final decision will not be taken until around 2025.

Gustavo Dudamel will leave the Los Angeles Philharmonic to lead the New York Philharmonic in 2026. The Venezuelan-born conductor was appointed music director in Los Angeles in 2009, aged just 27, and has breathed fresh air into the rarefied world of classical music. His mandate in New York is to help revitalise the financially troubled orchestra; he called it a “very interesting” challenge.

Correction: In Tuesday’s edition we incorrectly wrote that ChatGPT can generate images and videos. In fact it is OpenAI, a Microsoft-backed artificial-intelligence startup that created ChatGPT, which builds models that aim to do so. Sorry.

Fact of the day: 15, the average number of earthquakes stronger than magnitude 7 per year. See the full story.

The Northern Ireland protocol in court

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Wednesday Britain’s Supreme Court will give a ruling whose political implications will outweigh its legal impact. The court will decide if the Northern Ireland protocol, the post-Brexit fudge which created a trade border between Britain and Northern Ireland, conflicts with the Act of Union, which created the United Kingdom in 1801.

The case was brought by unionists who oppose the border. It is likely to be rejected. Lower courts in Belfast have previously ruled that the protocol conflicts with the Act of Union but that it is nevertheless legal because British MPs voted for it. Any ruling against the protocol could be overturned in Westminster.

The judgment comes as Britain and the EU are reportedly near a deal to reduce checks on goods moving across the Irish Sea border. The judgment will have no legal impact on the talks, but drawing attention to the protocol as a constitutional issue makes the technical compromise harder to swallow for Northern Ireland’s unionists.

Sri Lanka’s economic crisis continues

PHOTO: AP
Amid an ongoing currency crisis and months after protests ousted a president, Sri Lanka’s woes persist. Medicine and fuel are scarce and power cuts occur daily. On Wednesday thousands of unionised workers, including doctors and bankers, will strike and protest against a recent increase in income taxes.

On the same day Ranil Wickremesinghe, the president, who was chosen by Parliament after Gotabaya Rajapaksa quit, will ambitiously outline his policies for the next 25 years. He has already raised taxes and electricity tariffs, frozen public-sector recruitment and ordered sweeping spending cuts. The reforms are required to secure a $2.9bn loan from the IMF, which has stalled because China, a major creditor, is yet to offer a debt restructuring plan that will be acceptable to the IMF. And resistance to the painful policies back home is spreading. Mr Wickremesinghe lacks public backing to push through the toughest reforms. His coalition is expected to lose in local elections on March 9th.

Iger’s first quarter back at Disney

PHOTO: REUTERS
Three months ago, after Disney’s streaming business, Disney+, lost $1bn in a quarter, the entertainment giant fired its chief executive. Bob Iger was brought back from retirement and given two years to turn it around. On Wednesday Disney will report its latest quarterly earnings, the first with him back in charge.

Last year the firm’s market value nearly halved. Seeking to recoup some losses at Disney+, Mr Iger raised subscription prices in December. A new “Avatar” film, which has made more than $2bn at the box office, and busy theme parks have helped edge the share price up by around 25% this year.

Mr Iger is also reportedly considering licensing more content to competitors. But he is under fire from Nelson Peltz, an activist investor who is demanding a seat on the board and has complained about the firm’s creaking balance-sheet. Investors will be looking for news of Mr Iger’s plans for ABC, Disney’s broadcast network and ESPN, its sports channel.


North Korea puts on a military show

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
After months of rehearsals, the big day is here. Satellite imagery suggests that North Korean soldiers and civilians have been training for a military parade celebrating the 75th anniversary of the founding of the Korean People’s Army on Wednesday. Expect marching troops, citizens in formation spelling out slogans and jets racing across the skies over Pyongyang, the capital.

North Korea loves to mark anniversaries. But the parade also signals the country’s readiness for war. On Monday Kim Jong Un, the country’s dictator, discussed “intensifying” its military drills with his generals. That came exactly 60 years after his grandfather, Kim Il Sung, said that each North Korean soldier must be ready to kill 100 enemies.

Those perceived enemies are still to the south. South Korea’s conservative president, Yoon Suk-yeol, has similarly been talking about creating a deterrent that would strike “100 or 1,000 times” harder than any North Korean blow. Koreans on both sides of the border will be hoping that their leaders are just posturing.

Trailblazing ​​Kuwaiti women on screen

PHOTO: NETFLIX
“The Exchange”, an Arabic-language drama about two of the first women working at Kuwait’s stock exchange in the 1980s, is released on Netflix on Wednesday. Dressed in vibrant suits with coiffed hair, Munira and Farida take on the boys’ club together. Though they are often disregarded, they manage to rise through the ranks. Filmed entirely in Kuwait, “The Exchange” was inspired by pioneering businesswomen that Nadia Ahmad, one of the show’s writers, knew growing up.

Netflix released its first original Arabic-language series, “Jinn”, in 2019. Since then it has featured more Arab women on both sides of the camera. “Finding Ola”, about an Egyptian divorcee, was produced by and starred Hend Sabry, a Tunisian-Egyptian film star. Arab women have often appeared one-dimensional in Western art, portrayed as either oppressed or orientalised. Helping them tell their own stories will change that.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Please note, the way we choose winners has changed. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which female mathematician is generally regarded as the first to write a computer programme?

Tuesday: Which 1952 western stars Gary Cooper as a marshal who must face a gang of killers on his own?

We may brave human laws, but we cannot resist natural ones.

Jules Verne
