The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (01:43 GMT+1 / 08:43 Hong Kong)

American bond yields remained high and stockmarkets braced ahead of a meeting of the Federal Reserve, at which central bankers may raise interest rates by as much as 0.75 percentage points to combat stubborn inflation. Investors fear this could push the world economy into recession. On Monday the S&P 500 fell by 3.9%, entering bear-market for the first time in more than two years.

Ukraine said that its forces were holding out in Severodonetsk, despite the fact that Russia has destroyed the last remaining bridge linking the besieged city to the rest of the Donbas region. More than 500 civilians are said to be trapped inside a chemical factory. Oleksandr Stryuk, the mayor, said that evacuations were being carried out “every minute when there is a lull”. Ukraine’s government said it is losing between 100 and 200 soldiers a day in fighting across the country.

Abiy Ahmed, Ethiopia’s prime minister, said that his government had formed a committee to negotiate with separatist forces in Tigray, a northern province. Fighting has blighted the region since November 2020; hundreds of thousands of people have died in the violence or of starvation. The conflict has eased since the government declared a ceasefire in March.

The European Union said it would sign an agreement to procure 110,000 doses of a monkeypox vaccine, to be delivered from the end of June, without naming the supplier. The bloc has so far recorded 900 cases of the virus. America’s drug regulator has approved a smallpox vaccine made by Bavarian Nordic, a Danish firm, for use against monkeypox. The WHO will convene an emergency committee next week to determine whether the outbreak represents a public-health emergency of international concern

The first flight carrying asylum-seekers from Britain to Rwanda was cancelled within hours of its departure, after the European Court of Human Rights issued last-minute injunctions stopping the deportations. The number of migrants to be deported had already fallen to single digits in recent days. Earlier in the day Prime Minister Boris Johnson had hinted that Britain might withdraw from the European Convention on Human Rights to prevent it blocking the controversial policy.

Russia banned dozens of British journalists and defence officials from entering the country for what it called the “deliberate dissemination of false and one-sided information” about its invasion of Ukraine. The list, which bars 49 people, is a retaliation for Western sanctions and follows a similar one last month targeting Americans and Canadians.

America’s House of Representatives passed a bill extending security protections to the families of Supreme Court justices. The measure, which has yet to be signed into law by President Joe Biden, was introduced in the wake of widespread protests over a leaked draft indicating the court would overturn Roe v Wade, the 1973 ruling that guaranteed the right to an abortion. The bill took on more significance last week when an armed man was arrested near Justice Brett Kavanaugh’s home.

Fact of the day: 48%, the share of South Africans who think migrants are “dishonest”. Read the full article.

The Fed eyes a jumbo rate rise

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As chairman of the Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell prizes predictability, giving investors ample guidance to prepare them for policy changes. But the past few days have been a whirlwind. Before Monday, virtually all bets were on the Fed raising interest rates by half a percentage point on Wednesday at the end of a regular rate-setting meeting. Suddenly, the table has slanted in a more hawkish direction: markets have now priced in a three-quarter-point increase.

That larger increment, taking rates to a range between 1.5% and 1.75%, would be the biggest single rise since 1994. The message would be clear: with inflation running at more than 8% year-on-year, the Fed is determined to bring prices under control. History suggests that rapid monetary tightening often precedes a recession. But the Fed knows that runaway inflation would be even worse.


China’s economic loop

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Economic policymakers sometimes complain that their job is like steering a car by looking in the rear-view mirror: the data that guide them reflect the past, not the future. That is less of a problem when the economy is going round in circles.

On Wednesday China is due to publish figures on industrial production, retail sales and unemployment for May. Shanghai was then under a strict lockdown to contain a covid-19 outbreak and other parts of the country were also trammelled by restrictions on free movement and gathering. The figures are likely to be bad (though less bad than the month before). The hope is that China can put this covid outbreak behind it and stage a rapid recovery. But infections in both Beijing and Shanghai are already raising fears of another lockdown. The worry, then, is that China’s bad economic data will be a guide to the country’s future as well as its past.

How India squashes protest at home

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Nupur Sharma, a spokesperson for India’s governng Bharatiya Janata Party, was hardly blazing a trail when she disparaged the Prophet Muhammad on right-wing chat shows last month. Taboos against offending the Muslim minority are falling by the day. A former BJP officeholder, campaigning in the state of Uttar Pradesh, boasted recently that local Muslims “have stopped wearing skull caps…If you vote for me again, they will start wearing tilak”, a mark on the forehead worn by many Hindus.

But Ms Sharma overstepped, by offending Muslims abroad. Countries in the Gulf led a diplomatic backlash. Eventually the BJP suspended her. Still the past week has shown why India’s Muslims tend to be quiescent. Police crackdowns against local protesters were fierce: two were killed, 30 wounded and 400 arrested. In Uttar Pradesh activists’ homes were demolished. On Monday Indian Muslim groups asked their followers to suspend further demonstrations.

Apple’s labour fight

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
After years of declining membership, American unions are having a moment. Spurred by a tight labour market, union drives are spreading in the technology and retail industries. In the past six months an Amazon warehouse in New York City and a Starbucks café in Buffalo, New York have become the first unionised branches in those companies.

Apple could be next. Employees at its shops are frustrated about stagnant wages and claim that the company’s management disregards health and safety. On Wednesday workers at a shop in Maryland will begin voting on whether to unionise.

Apple is not taking to the idea. Like Amazon and Starbucks, it has been campaigning hard against unionisation. A shop in Atlanta has already cancelled a vote. Even if Maryland workers choose to organise, unions will have a long way to go. There are 271 other Apple stores in America.

More TV shows are out and proud

PHOTO: HULU
The third and final season of “Love, Victor” is released on Wednesday. The comedy-drama follows an American secondary-school pupil as he comes to terms with being gay.

The show—a spin-off from “Love, Simon”, a film about a pupil at risk of being outed—once struggled to find a home. At first it was intended for release on Disney+ but was moved to Hulu because of its “adult themes”. There, it became one of the platform’s most-binged programmes in 2020 and was praised for a less saccharine depiction of LGBT issues than the original.

The third season will air on both platforms. LGBT dramas are becoming more popular on big streaming services. In April Netflix’s “Heartstopper”, based on a web-comic, charmed audiences with its portrayal of queer romance at a British all-boys school. “First Kill”, also on Netflix, hopes to draw on the same success with a tale of a lesbian vampire and vampire hunter. Fans of “Love, Victor” will have choices this pride month.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which rock star wrote books such as “In His Own Write” and “A Spaniard in the Works”?

Tuesday: Who was the second-longest-serving Indian prime minister to date, surpassed only by her father?

If fate means you to lose, give him a good fight anyhow.

William McFee
