The world in brief
August 30, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

America’s commerce secretary, Gina Raimondo, met China’s premier, Li Qiang, during a visit aimed at improving waning trade and lacklustre co-operation between the two countries. Ms Raimondo said that America wants to work with China on issues including climate change and artificial intelligence. On Monday Ms Raimondo insisted that trade in less sensitive industries could be boosted without making compromises on national-security concerns, which have led both sides to impose restrictions.

Joe Biden identified the first ten prescription drugs that will be subject to price negotiations between Medicare (government-funded health insurance for Americans aged 65 or older) and pharmaceutical companies. The list includes blood-thinners and diabetes drugs. Under the Inflation Reduction Act, the negotiated prices—in effect, set by officials—will take effect in 2026. Mr Biden said that up to 9m people will benefit from the reductions.

Yevgeny Prigozhin, the Wagner boss who died last week in a suspicious plane crash, was buried in a private ceremony in St Petersburg, according to his press team. The Kremlin earlier said that President Vladimir Putin would not attend. In June Mr Prigozhin launched a mutiny against the Russian army. Valery Chekalov, Wagner’s logistics chief, was also buried on Tuesday.

Ahmed Attaf, Algeria’s foreign minister, proposed a six-month plan for Niger to transition back to democracy. Niger’s ruling junta, which seized power on July 26th, apparently favours a three-year timeline for such a shift. Mr Attaf met last week with some members of ECOWAS. The regional bloc has threatened to use force to reinstate the ousted president, Mohamed Bazoum; Algeria opposes military intervention.

3M, an American industrial giant, agreed to pay $5bn in cash and $1bn in stock to settle 260,000 lawsuits from American troops whose hearing was damaged by defective earplugs. The Combat Arms earplugs were made by Aearo Technologies, a 3M subsidiary, and used in Afghanistan and Iraq. The case is one of the largest mass torts in American history.

Wages in Germany rose at an annual rate of 6.6% in the second quarter, the fastest rise since 2008 when the data were first collected. For the first time since 2021 wages are rising faster than the rate of inflation, which was 6.5% in the same period. That may help consumption but could push the inflation rate up further.

Chess stars Hans Niemann and Magnus Carlsen announced they would end their litigious dispute. Mr Niemann had filed a $100m lawsuit against Mr Carlsen, chess.com and Hikaru Nakamura, a streamer, over allegations he cheated in a match with Mr Carlsen last year. The spat drew global attention when Elon Musk backed unfounded rumours that Mr Neimann had used vibrating anal beads as a wireless signalling device.

Figure of the day: 24,000, the number of Americans living in the Netherlands in 2022—up from 15,000 in 2013. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
EU defence ministers meet
The war in Ukraine has shown that the EU has a long way to go before it can defend itself without American help. On Wednesday its defence ministers will meet in Toledo, Spain, to discuss how to grow stronger. One perennial stumbling block is joint arms purchases. The EU has dedicated €1bn ($1.1bn) to reimburse countries that give ammunition to Ukraine. But a further €1bn programme to jointly buy more shells for Ukraine has been slowed by arguments over whether they can be bought from non-European countries such as South Korea.

The ministers will also be talking about Africa. Europe’s role in fighting Islamist insurgents there is in question: France called off its Operation Barkhane in the Sahel last year, and the leaders of the recent coup in Niger want the remaining French soldiers there to leave. Stability in northern Africa is vital to keeping Europe safe from terrorism, but African countries are increasingly wary of European help.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Victory for Turkey’s arms sector
Teknofest, a festival which kicks off in Ankara on Wednesday, is part aerial show, part science fair and part rock concert. But for Turkey’s government it is most of all a chance to show off the country’s booming defence sector. Guests, including tens of thousands of schoolchildren, will see fighter jets screaming through the skies, accompanied by armed TB2 and Akinci drones, the crown jewels of Turkey’s weapons programme.

Turkey’s aerospace and arms exports reached a record $4.4bn last year. This year looks even better. Baykar, which produces the drones, is run by Selcuk Bayraktar, a popular businessman who is also the son-in-law of the country’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Earlier this summer the firm signed an agreement worth $3.1bn to supply machines to Saudi Arabia—the largest defence deal in Turkey’s history. Wednesday in Turkey is also Victory Day, commemorating the defeat of Greece, a century ago. Turkey’s arms manufacturers have plenty to celebrate.


PHOTO: WHO / BILLY MIARON
Climate change imperils African health
Health-care professionals and policymakers from across Africa have gathered in Botswana this week under the auspices of the World Health Organisation. On Wednesday they will consider how to prepare government health services for public-health emergencies; Africa faces the most of any region in the world.

The continent’s high disaster rate is driven by outbreaks of infectious disease, conflict, humanitarian crises and extreme-weather events. All are exacerbated by climate change, to which Africa is uniquely vulnerable. Africa accounts for over 90% of the world’s burden of malaria—a disease which spreads far more easily the hotter it gets. Malnutrition and diarrhoeal diseases, such as cholera, are worsened by droughts and floods.

Delegates in Botswana will discuss how to respond, including by expanding access to primary health care. But, given that Africa produces the least emissions of any region in the world, a crucial cause of its crises is out of its hands.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Salesforce’s slimming pays off
Over the course of this year the share price of Salesforce, a business-software company, has rocketed by 60%, roughly twice the overall gain in the tech-heavy Nasdaq index. The formerly flabby firm has been hurriedly getting into shape since a pack of activist investors began circling late last year. Its operating margin hit 28% in the first quarter of 2023, up from 18% a year earlier. It is in the midst of laying off 8,000 workers, some 10% of its total, and has hinted at more redundancies to come. Investors will be looking for further signs of temperance when it reports results for the second quarter on Wednesday.

Besides tightening Salesforce’s belt, Marc Benioff, the chief executive and co-founder, has tapped into investors’ enthusiasm for artificial intelligence. In March Salesforce announced it would embed “Einstein GPT”, an AI-powered chatbot, into its software.



PHOTO: AP
Films without stars in Venice
The 80th Venice Film Festival opens on Wednesday with “Comandante”, an Italian drama set on a submarine during the second world war. It is an unusually unglamorous choice. But this year’s original opening film, “Challengers”, was withdrawn after the Hollywood actors’ strike began. Zendaya, its leading lady, is a member of the Screen Actors Guild—one of the unions that called a strike, and whose members cannot therefore promote their latest projects.

Still, several showpiece productions are premiering at the festival without their stars. Three biopics are especially noteworthy. The first is “Maestro”, a film about the composer Leonard Bernstein, which is both directed by and starring Bradley Cooper. “Ferrari”, the second, features Adam Driver as Enzo Ferrari, a motor-racing magnate, and is directed by Michael Mann. The third, “Priscilla”, directed by Sofia Coppola, sees Cailee Spaeny in the role of Priscilla Presley (pictured), a businesswoman and former wife of Elvis. The films’ producers will all be hoping that five-star reviews can provide some of the publicity not generated by their absent celebrities.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: What two word term is often used to describe the period of civil conflict in Northern Ireland from the late 1960s to 1998?

Tuesday: Which business magazine was founded by Henry Luce in 1929?

The beginning is always today.

Mary Shelley
