The world in brief
May 20, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

President Joe Biden reportedly told leaders at the G7, a club of rich democracies, that America will support an effort to train Ukraine’s pilots on F-16 fighter jets. The comments came ahead of Volodymyr Zelensky’s arrival at the G7 talks in Japan, where the Ukrainian president is likely to ask for more military support. On Friday Mr Zelensky spoke at the Arab League summit in Saudi Arabia, where he accused some of the assembled countries of "turning a blind eye" to Russia’s conduct.

After a bout of optimism, markets fell on the news that America’s debt-ceiling talks had stalled. A negotiator for Kevin McCarthy, the Republican speaker of the House who is seeking spending cuts in exchange for lifting the borrowing limit, emerged from a meeting on Friday saying it was “time to press pause”. Earlier Mr McCarthy had speculated that a deal could be reached by the weekend.

James Gorman, Morgan Stanley’s chief executive, will step down within 12 months after 13 years in the role. During Mr Gorman’s tenure Morgan Stanley diversified from trading and investment banking, to focus on the less volatile business of wealth management. Its market capitalisation tripled under his leadership to around $140bn

Tim Scott, a mild-mannered black Republican senator from South Carolina, entered America’s 2024 presidential race. He will face better known and more pugnacious challengers for his party’s nomination, namely Donald Trump and Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor. Just 2% of Republicans plan to vote for Mr Scott, according to polling averages.

Britain will invest £1bn ($1.24bn) in its domestic semiconductor industry, bolstering a sector that is exposed to geopolitical tensions and supply-chain disruptions. The long-awaited strategy prioritises research and design over manufacturing. It is dwarfed by an American act that introduced over $52bn in subsidies and incentives, as well as by state aid in the EU, currently worth €43bn ($46.4bn).

Protesters gathered outside Tbilisi airport in Georgia’s capital as a Russian passenger plane landed in the country for the first time since 2019. Russia had banned air travel with Georgia in response to anti-Moscow rallies. Anti-Russian sentiment runs deep in the country, which fought a five-day war with Russia in 2008 and is currently home to some 26,000 Ukrainians displaced by the Kremlin’s invasion of Ukraine.

Jim Brown, an American football player, actor and civil rights activist, died at age 87. Mr Brown led the Cleveland Browns to the national title in 1964, using this platform as a sports star to champion racial equality. After retiring from American football he appeared in more than 30 films. His achievements were marred by run-ins with the law, often over allegations of violence against women.

Word of the week: décroissance, or “de-growth” in French. The aim of some left-leaning Europeans, who would like to deliberately shrink the economy in the hope of avoiding ecological and societal collapse. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Quad leaders cobble together a meeting
The leaders of America, Australia, India and Japan will scramble to hold talks on the sidelines of the G7 in Japan this weekend, after the official meeting of their group of four nations, known as the Quad, was cancelled. The summit, due to be held in Sydney next week, fell through after America’s debt-ceiling crisis forced President Joe Biden to pull out.

The reversal is an embarrassment for the Quad, whose purpose, in preserving “a free and open Indo-Pacific”, is to project unity against China. America’s critics already grumble that it is an unreliable partner. American political dysfunction, Chinese propagandists declare, hampers its commitment to the region.

Optics matter for the Quad because it has few concrete achievements since it formed in 2017 (for the second time, after an initial effort foundered). But in reality, the damage is superficial. All four of its members worry about China’s growing muscle. As long as China continues to flex, the group has a mission.


PHOTO: AP
A boost for India’s opposition
On Saturday Siddaramaiah, who goes by one name, will be sworn in as the new leader of Karnataka, an affluent southern Indian state. The 75-year-old went through the same ceremony in 2013. But for his Congress party, the ritual will feel very different. In the decade since 2013, Congress has suffered relentless defeats to the Bharatiya Janata Party, India’s ruling party. In April the BJP disqualified Rahul Gandhi, Congress’s leader, from parliament over a spurious defamation case.

Under such circumstances, Congress’s toppling of the BJP in Karnataka feels momentous, and will burnish its credibility as the national opposition. Yet the result will probably not be a bellwether for the next general election in May 2024. Karnataka’s voters have a strong tradition of anti-incumbency and most of Congress’s increased vote came at the expense of a third regional party. At the national level, the BJP will continue to dominate.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Architecture Biennale puts the spotlight on Africa
Of the 100 projects, installations and buildings on display in the main show of the Venice Architecture Biennale in 2018, only two were by Africans. Five years on, the pendulum has swung completely. In this year’s exhibition, which opens on Saturday, half of the 89 participants are from Africa or the African diaspora.

Lesley Lokko, a Ghanaian-Scottish architect, curated the show, which is called “The Laboratory of the Future”. The title refers to the impact the youngest continent will have on the rest of the world. “What happens in Africa happens to us all,” Ms Lokko said. But it also nods to the challenge Africa faces to “reimagine” its built environment, as David Adjaye, an architect showing at the biennale, puts it. The continent needs more infrastructure, and much of what exists is modelled on Western-style skyscrapers. “Unscrambling that to interpret your own modernity”, he says, “is very hard”.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Katie Taylor’s homecoming boxing match
Ireland’s Katie Taylor may be the best female boxer in the world. She won gold at the 2012 Olympics and since turning professional four years later has won all 22 of her fights. She is the undisputed lightweight champion.

As a 15-year-old, Ms Taylor won Ireland’s first officially sanctioned female boxing match. But she has not fought much at home since then. Months before her first professional bout in 2016, gunmen stormed a weigh-in at a hotel in Dublin and killed a man belonging to a drug gang. That led to an unofficial ban on major fights in the country.

Amid very tight security, on Saturday night Ms Taylor will compete as a professional in her home country for the first time. Her opponent is Britain’s Chantelle Cameron, the undisputed super-lightweight champion. Should Ms Taylor win, she will become only the third fighter ever, male or female, to become undisputed winner in two weight classes. That would further strengthen her status as the world’s best.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Guillermo Lasso, Ecuador’s beleaguered president
For years Ecuador avoided the troubles that have plagued its neighbours in Latin America. The country hasn’t experienced military rule since 1979 nor did it suffer much from violence. But this exceptionalism is now in danger. A crime wave related to drug-trafficking has seen the country’s homicide rates race past those of Colombia and Mexico, to more than 25 per 100,000 people. The country’s politics is in turmoil as well. On Wednesday Guillermo Lasso, the conservative president, used a previously untried constitutional rule known as muerte cruzada (“mutual death”) to dissolve the parliament after it looked poised to impeach him on flimsy charges of embezzlement. Snap presidential and parliamentary elections will follow within 97 days.

Mr Lasso was elected on a campaign to ensure political stability. The 67-year-old’s conservatism was shaped by his background. He grew up in a middle-class family in Guayaquil, a business hub on Ecuador’s Pacific Coast. He did not complete a university degree, but that did not stop him from climbing to the top of Ecuador’s financial elite, earning a fortune in banking.

Later he entered local politics, overseeing the construction of a giant bus terminal in his hometown. Such successes propelled him into the national arena. But it took years for a breakthrough. In 2013 Mr Lasso lost the presidential election to Rafael Correa, the populist firebrand who led Ecuador from 2007 to 2017. He lost to Mr Correa’s proxy in 2017.

After finally winning the presidency in 2021, Mr Lasso’s tenure started well. He led a successful covid-19 vaccine drive, inoculating half of the Ecuadorean population in just 100 days. And the economy has been buoyant. Last year GDP grew by 3%, faster than the regional average. But surging drug-related violence and prison riots have hurt Mr Lasso’s reputation. His inexperienced team failed to build a coalition to prevent the opposition Citizens’ Revolution, led by Mr Correa, from controlling parliament. That allowed Citizens’ Revolution to launch impeachment proceedings.

Mr Lasso’s dissolution of parliament is not popular. The opposition has claimed it is illegal; protests are a possibility. But by guaranteeing elections relatively soon, Mr Lasso may ensure Ecuador retains some exceptionalism by avoiding the political violence that has beset neighbouring Peru.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down A rich club drunkenly grooves up fen (5,2,5)

1 across Radiance and celebration heard around the world (6)

2 across Circle it: a circuit! (5)

3 across No right way home to Oslo (6)

Factual clues

1 down Countries whose relevance has faded along with their share of the global economy (5,2,5)

1 across Where the race to transform payments is going (6)

2 across A destination for wealthy space cadets (5)

3 across One country American firms are eyeing up for supply chains (6)



This week’s quiz winners
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Maureen Evans Vernon, Vernon, British Columbia, Canada

Craig Sinfield-Hain, Walferdange, Luxembourg

Tetsuyuki Maruyama, Ito, Japan

They gave the correct answers: Strait of Malacca, Steve Rogers, Mel Brooks, Pat Cash and Horatio Nelson. The theme is male country singers: George Strait, Kenny Rogers, Garth Brooks, Johnny Cash and Willie Nelson.

The questions:
Monday: Which stretch of water between the Malay peninsula and Sumatra is the main shipping lane between the Indian and Pacific oceans?
Tuesday: What is the real name of the superhero Captain America?
Wednesday: Which film director was responsible for a range of 1970s comedies including “Blazing Saddles” and “Young Frankenstein”?
Thursday: Which Australian male tennis player won his only Grand Slam title at Wimbledon in 1987?
Friday: Which British admiral lost both an arm and partial sight in one eye during his illustrious naval career?

Bad men need nothing more to compass their ends, than that good men should look on and do nothing.

John Stuart Mill
