The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 6, 2023
Protesters in Greece clashed with police during demonstrations in Athens over a train crash on Tuesday which killed at least 57 people. Rail workers have been on strike since Thursday. Greeks blame their government and the country’s train companies for underinvestment which has led to safety failures. The stationmaster accused of causing the accident, by directing two trains onto the same track, has been charged with endangering lives and disrupting public transport.

After more than a decade of talks, negotiators at the UN have agreed to the text of a treaty to safeguard the oceans. The High Seas Treaty will turn 30% of the world’s international waters into protected areas by 2030 in an attempt to preserve marine life. It is the first ocean treaty to be signed since 1982.

The director-general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi, said talks with Iran’s atomic energy organisation had been “constructive”. The meeting came after uranium particles enriched to 83.7% purity, close to the grade needed to make nuclear weapons, were detected at a nuclear facility. Iran reportedly agreed to increase inspections at the site and restore monitoring equipment that it had removed.

Israel’s president, Binyamin Netanyahu, said a comment made by his far-right finance minister, Bezalel Smotrich, who called for the Palestinian town of ​​Huwara to be “wiped out” by Israel, was “inappropriate”. Mr Smotrich’s comment has prompted protests in Israel and abroad. Mr Smotrich is due to speak at a conference in Washington next week but rights groups are calling for his visa to be cancelled.

About 12,000 people are without shelter after a fire swept through Kutupalong, a Rohingya refugee camp in south-eastern Bangladesh. No casualties have been reported, but according to the country’s refugee commissioner, the blaze destroyed some 2,000 shelters, at least 35 mosques and 21 learning centres. The overcrowded Kutupalong and nearby camps house more than 900,000 Rohingyas.

Police in Pakistan appeared to try and fail to arrest Imran Khan, the country’s prime minister until last April, at his home in Lahore. The warrant for Mr Khan relates to charges of failing to declare official gifts and re-selling them. But Mr Khan faces other charges, from terrorism to corruption. The authorities may have been testing the reaction of his army of supporters if he were to be arrested.

A single recorded by the J6 Prison Choir, made up of men who are in prison for their involvement in the January 6th attack on the Capitol, features a sample recorded by former president Donald Trump. “Justice for all” comprises a melancholic rendition of the “The Star-Spangled Banner”, over which Mr Trump can be heard reciting the Pledge of Allegiance.

Fact of the day: 2.7m, the number of cars in Baghdad. The roads of Iraq’s capital were designed for just 200,000 vehicles. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AFP
Iran’s capacity to make nuclear weapons
A crisis over Iran’s nuclear programme is brewing, again. Last week the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), a nuclear watchdog, confirmed that in late January it had discovered uranium particles enriched to 83.7% purity, close to the grade needed to make nuclear weapons, at the Fordow nuclear facility.

On Saturday, during a trip to Iran, Rafael Grossi, the director-general of the IAEA (pictured, with Mohammad Eslami, the head of the Atomic Energy Organisation of Iran), said Iran had agreed to restore cameras and other monitoring equipment it removed from nuclear sites last year. But that may not be enough to stop Western governments from seeking to rebuke Iran during an IAEA board meeting in Vienna on Monday.

Last week Bill Burns, the CIA’s director, said that Iran had not yet decided to build a nuclear weapon. But it could build one increasingly quickly. In 2018 when Donald Trump tore up a multinational nuclear deal, it would have taken Iran 12 months to produce enough fissile material for a bomb. Now it would take just 12 days.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Fractures in Turkey’s political opposition
Turkey’s main opposition alliance, a coalition of six parties headed by the Republican People’s Party (CHP) and the İYI (“Good”) party, seemed to have the wind in its sails ahead of a presidential election due on May 14th. The incumbent, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, faced pressure because of slowing economic growth and an inflation rate of 55%, even before his government’s slow response to deadly earthquakes last month drew criticism.

The group, known as the “table of six”, had been expected on Monday to anoint Kemal Kilicdaroglu (pictured), the leader of the CHP, as its candidate for president. But on March 3rd İYI’s leader, Meral Aksener, signalled she would withdraw her party from the alliance, refusing to back Mr Kilicdaroglu

The five remaining parties are still expected to nominate Mr Kilicdaroglu. Mrs Aksener may decide to run herself, become reconciled to Mr Kilicdaroglu's candidacy, or even ally with Mr Erdogan. With the opposition in turmoil, Mr Erdogan must be rubbing his hands.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Chile’s constitutional redo, redux
Late last year Chileans roundly rejected a new version of the country’s constitution, with 62% voting against the proposal. On Monday a committee will start on another attempt.

At 388 articles, the rejected charter would have been among the world’s longest. The document—developed over the course of a year after massive protests roiled Chile in 2019—was far broader in scope than most constitutions, too. Designed by a “constitutional convention” stuffed with left-wingers (and supported by Gabriel Boric, Chile’s president) it would have enshrined trade unions’ right to strike and weakened property laws, among other things. Economists estimated that it would have increased government spending by as much as 14% of GDP.

Half of the 24 experts given the task of creating the next version were appointed by legislators, in part to try and rein in the excesses of the previous draft. They have until May, when a constitutional council will be elected to create the final document. The public will vote on it in December.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The future of gene editing
The Third International Summit on Human Genome Editing starts on Monday in London. Just before the previous one in 2018, a Chinese researcher announced that he had created the world’s first genetically edited babies—a move that was roundly condemned. No similar bombshells are expected at this year’s summit, which will probably consider both hopes and fears for the technology as it becomes more widespread.

On the hopeful side, gene editing is creating an entirely new category of drugs that can target single or multiple genes. A drug called exa-cel, to treat sickle-cell disease, is moving through regulatory agencies in America and Europe. Such speedy progress was hard to imagine in 2015, when the first summit was held.

But the fears are significant. Making heritable changes to the human genome presents an ethical minefield; the prospect of a gene-edited pathogen poses security challenges. Scientists are keen to discuss just how imagined science-fiction horrors could be averted.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Michelin Guide’s fading stars
Diners may never know which aspects of the truffle-heavy tasting menu underwhelmed the inspectors. But the latest edition of Michelin’s restaurant guide, published on Monday, will strip Guy Savoy, long considered the world’s best chef, of the third star which has adorned the establishment that bears his name in Paris since 2002. A similar fate awaits La Rochelle, a seafood restaurant run by Christopher Coutanceau, a fisherman and chef, on the west coast of France.

Review season always has chefs wringing their aprons. But this one may feel particularly cutting. France, the home of the guide and the country with the most starred restaurants, will lose 25 honours. Michelin argues that a correction is needed after it halted downgrades during the pandemic. It will add to the woes of fine-dining establishments, already squeezed by rising costs and labour shortages. Such pressure has forced one of the world’s best restaurants, Noma, in Copenhagen, to announce that it will temporarily close to reinvent itself.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Monday: Which crime-fighting lawyer suffered two narrow defeats when he ran for President on the Republican ticket in 1944 and 1948?

There are two sides to every issue: one side is right and the other is wrong, but the middle is always evil.

Ayn Rand
