The world in brief
March 25, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

King Charles III postponed his visit to France as protests continued against Emmanuel Macron’s controversial pension reforms. Demonstrations turned violent in several cities as police deployed tear gas and water cannons; a town hall in Bordeaux was set on fire. More than 450 arrests and 441 injuries to security forces were reported. Officials said more than 1m people turned out across the country. More protests and strikes have been planned for next week.

Rahul Gandhi, the leader of India’s opposition, was disqualified as a member of parliament. On Thursday Mr Gandhi was sentenced to two years in prison for a comment he had made about the surname of Narendra Modi, the prime minister, in 2019. Mr Gandhi was then granted bail and will appeal against the verdict. His party, the Congress, led protests against the recent announcement, declaring that democracy is “in danger”.

Paul Rusesabagina, whose life inspired the film “Hotel Rwanda”, will be released from prison on Saturday, according to the country’s government. Mr Rusesabagina found fame after saving hundreds of lives during the Rwandan genocide of 1994, later becoming an opposition leader. He was sentenced to 25 years in prison after Paul Kagame, Rwanda’s authoritarian leader, orchestrated his arrest on “terrorism” charges in 2021.

The share prices of several European banks dropped, with that of Deutsche Bank, a German lender, closing down by nearly 9% in Frankfurt on Friday. Investors remain concerned about the ongoing turmoil in the wider banking sector, particularly after the hasty rescue of Credit Suisse, an embattled Swiss bank. Their fears were not allayed by the interest-rate increases announced by several central banks this week.

America and Canada agreed to new rules governing asylum-seekers crossing their shared border. Each country can turn them back within 14 days of crossing anywhere along the border; previously the rule applied only at official crossings. The deal is intended to stop the flow of asylum-seekers entering Quebec from New York, which has become a sore point for Canada.

Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, met his British counterpart, Rishi Sunak, in Downing Street to discuss strengthening strategic ties between their countries. Thousands of Israelis have demonstrated against Mr Netanyahu’s attempts to curb the power of Israel’s independent judiciary. In Britain Mr Netanyahu faced similar cries of dissent: protesters shouted “shame” as talks commenced.

An asteroid with a diameter of roughly 40m to 90m—large enough to destroy a city—will pass between the orbits of Earth and the moon on Saturday. 2023 DZ2, as it is called, will fly close enough to our planet to be seen through binoculars and small telescopes. This will give astronomers a rare opportunity to study an object of its size.

Word of the week: Taqlid, an Islamic term that means “the practice of strict obedience to the ayatollahs”. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The vice tightens around Donald Trump
Thirty years ago a shoot-out between law enforcement and a fringe religious group in Waco, Texas, left 76 of the cult’s members dead. The so-called Waco siege entered far-right, vigilante lore. Timothy McVeigh cited it as his motivation for the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995; one of the January 6th Capitol rioters referenced it at a hearing. So Waco is an apt place for Donald Trump to contemplate the rule of law.

On Saturday the former president will hold a 15,000-person campaign rally in Waco ahead of a probable indictment. Next week Manhattan’s district attorney, Alvin Bragg, is expected to charge Mr Trump for allegedly concealing hush money paid to a porn actress. (Mr Trump calls this a “fairy tale”.) Republican toadies in Congress want in turn to investigate Mr Bragg. But any charges laid against Mr Trump, according to Mr Bragg’s lawyers, “will be because the rule of law and faithful execution of [his] duty require it”. A novel concept for Mr Trump and many of his supporters in Waco.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Kagame frees Paul Rusesabagina
Paul Rusesabagina’s life is already remarkable enough to have been turned into a Hollywood film. “Hotel Rwanda” (2004) shows how he saved hundreds of lives during the Rwandan genocide of 1994 while he was the manager of a plush hotel in Kigali, the capital. Mr Rusesabagina drew on his fame to criticise Paul Kagame, the country’s autocratic president, and became an opposition leader. Mr Kagame increasingly saw Mr Rusesabagina as a threat, and orchestrated his arrest on terrorism charges in 2020. But, despite later being sentenced to 25 years in prison, the government has suddenly announced that Mr Rusesabagina will be released on Saturday.

Only Mr Kagame knows why. It may be that the president believes he has proved his point to his most famous enemy. Or he wants to rebuild bridges with the West (Mr Rusesabagina is a permanent resident of America and a Belgian citizen). Whatever the reason, filmmakers would have plenty of material for a sequel.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Havoc on American spring break
Each spring swarms of students flock to America’s southern beach towns for a booze-fuelled week-long party. But this year in Miami Beach, a city on Florida’s coast, things got especially raucous. On March 19th, after two deadly shootings, the mayor imposed an emergency curfew and banned the sale of takeaway alcohol after 6pm in part of the city.

Legally, the rules lasted just 72 hours. But the implication was clear: Miami Beach was warding off the frat bros. Spring break brings few benefits to the local economy. Compared with other tourists, college students barely spend money. And resort-tax revenues do not cover the massive cost of policing the crowds. Moreover, attempts to change a party culture are often thwarted: when Miami Beach withheld permits for beach parties, entrepreneurial hosts took to the sea. Still, the revellers are not unwanted everywhere. South Padre Island, off the Texas coast, spent $15,000 to advertise on college campuses this year. It may come to regret it.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Asia’s art elite gather in Hong Kong
Not long ago the streets of Hong Kong were daubed in colourful protest graffiti. The authorities scrubbed it away—and with it free expression—after a draconian national-security law was introduced in 2020. But that has not stopped Hong Kong from touting itself as a cultural hub. M+, a swanky museum, opened in 2021. Now the city is hosting Art Basel Hong Kong, Asia’s leading contemporary art fair, which closes on Saturday.

The fair marks Hong Kong’s full post-pandemic return (attendees no longer need to wear masks) as the region’s art capital. It faces growing competition for that title. Seoul and Singapore hosted new art fairs while Hong Kong was shuttered by harsh covid restrictions. Yet Christie’s, an auction house, says the city retains strong appeal for art collectors and dealers in Asia, who like its favourable tax system and access to China, the world’s second-biggest art market after America. The city has lost many artistic freedoms, but some buyers appear unbothered.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Shou Zi Chew, TikTok’s studiously boring boss
TikTok’s billion-plus users long to be famous for 15 seconds. But the social-media app’s chief executive, Shou Zi Chew, avoids the limelight. Few of TikTok’s users would recognise the 40-year-old Singaporean, whose personal TikTok account, @shou.time, shows only 13 videos posted in the past year. He seldom gives interviews and his Wikipedia entry runs to about 150 words. Yet on Thursday Mr Chew was thrust before the world’s cameras as he gave evidence to a committee of America’s House of Representatives.

Democrats and Republicans alike fret that TikTok, which is owned by Bytedance, a Chinese company, is a tool for spying on American users and feeding them communist propaganda. TikTok has always denied this. On Thursday Mr Chew did his best to persuade his inquisitors that he was not out to brainwash Americans, but merely to entertain them and show them ads. (TikTok will book nearly $7bn in advertising in America this year, forecasts Insider Intelligence, a data company.)

Amid this fiery debate, Mr Chew is a reassuringly boring presence. He professes to enjoy golf (always plugging #golftok) and theoretical physics. A graduate of University College London and Harvard Business School, he worked for Goldman Sachs in London and interned at Facebook before returning to Asia for a stint in venture capital. He led the international business of Xiaomi, a Chinese smartphone company, before joining ByteDance in 2021 as chief financial officer. Two months later he took over at TikTok after its previous boss, a former Disney executive named Kevin Mayer, quit amid a failed attempt by Donald Trump’s government to force the app’s sale to an American buyer.

With President Joe Biden now reviving plans to separate TikTok from its Chinese owner—and with speculation that China might counter by withdrawing the app altogether—Mr Chew’s job is to convince congressmen that TikTok is not a threat. He is also keen to remind them of the wrath they might face if they shut down one of America’s favourite apps. In a rare video posted this week on TikTok, Mr Chew appeared in a Zuckerberg-esque jeans and hoodie to announce that the app had passed 150m users in America. The subtext to Congress: that would be a lot of angry current, and potential, voters.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Bank’s crisis due, originally, to some erratic trading (6,6)

1 across California has nothing in northern expanse (6)

2 across Business partially creates laziness (5)

3 across Unusual cause of vomiting—a kiss and a hug for me! (6)

Factual clues

1 down A 167-year-old institution that’s had a sudden demise (6,6)

1 across Somewhere richly endowed with natural resources, with a burgeoning tech ecosystem to boot (6)

2 across A company that’s been investing in Mexico (5)

3 across A type of animals China has banned the consumption of (6)



The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Arturo Zapata, Mexico City, Mexico

Mary Lou Finlay, Toronto, Canada

Margareta Hanes, Brussels, Belgium

They all gave the correct answers of Winter Palace, Pancho Villa, Black Forest gateau, Albion and Hotspur. The theme is English Premier League football teams: Crystal Palace, Aston Villa, Nottingham Forest, Brighton and Hove Albion and Tottenham Hotspur.

The questions were:
Which site in St Petersburg was the official residence of the Tsar and was stormed by revolutionaries in 1917?
Which Mexican revolutionary general became governor of Chihuahua but was assassinated in 1923?
What chocolate cake, with a cherry filling, shares its name with an area of Germany?
Which alternative name for England stems from the Latin word for “white”?
In “Henry IV”, what is the nickname of the character Henry Percy?

What the public wants is the image of passion, not passion itself.

Roland Barthes
