The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (23:38 GMT / 07:38 Hong Kong)

OPEC and its allies decided not to change their production targets as the cartel of oil-producing states waits to ascertain the impact of a new Western price cap on Russian crude. On Friday diplomats from the EU, the G7 and Australia agreed to cap Russian oil at $60 per barrel in an attempt to squeeze Russia’s revenues. Russia said it “will not accept” the cap, though admitted it had prepared for it. Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, called the policy “weak”, saying it would not cause “serious” damage to Russia.

There were reports that Iran was considering abolishing its morality police. Many observers were sceptical, but if true it would be a sign that the government may be bowing to ongoing protests. The unrest started in September after Mahsa Amini, a 22-year-old woman, died in custody having been arrested for violating the country’s dress code. On Saturday Iran’s attorney-general, Mohammad Jafar Montazeri, said parliament was reviewing a law requiring women to wear a hijab.

Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, said that the EU must “adapt” its state-aid rules in the face of American climate legislation. European leaders fear that America’s Inflation Reduction Act, which offers subsidies worth nearly $400bn for green industries, will draw investment away from the EU. During Emmanuel Macron’s visit to America last week, Joe Biden said that “tweaks” could be made to the legislation to allay European concerns.

Demonstrators in Syria attacked and set on fire the governor’s office in the southern city of Sweida. Heavy gunfire was reported during the incident. Earlier, hundreds of people had gathered outside the office protesting against spiralling prices, hunger and economic hardship, demanding the resignation of the president, Bashar al-Assad. The civil war, in particular, resulted in a severe contraction of the economy.

Urumqi, the capital of the Xinjiang region in north-west China, announced a lifting of covid restrictions after unprecedented protests against the government’s zero-covid policies. The city, where the wave of protests initially began, will reopen malls, restaurants, markets and some other venues from Monday. Other Chinese cities have recently eased restrictions as well in response to the popular unrest.

A volcano has erupted on Indonesia’s main island, Java, prompting the evacuation of almost 2,000 people as authorities issued a highest-level alert. Injuries have not immediately been reported, but residents were warned to keep 8km from Mount Semeru as it blasted clouds of ash and poured streams of lava. Indonesia experiences frequent volcanic activity; Semeru last erupted one year ago, killing 51 people.

Football World Cup: After a group stage punctuated by a series of extraordinary upsets, the first matches of the knockout round did not provide any shocks. England beat Senegal, whose star Sadio Mané is out of the tournament, and France, inspired by Kylian Mbappé, cruised past Poland.

Fact of the day: 670, the amount of gold in tonnes that central banks bought from January to September. Read the full story.

Squeezing Russian oil flows

PHOTO: AP
On Monday, the EU ban on seaborne crude oil from Russia comes into effect. At the same time, another complicated scheme to manipulate the energy markets has been agreed, designed to slash the flow of petrodollars fuelling Russia’s war in Ukraine while avoiding a global oil-supply shock.

European (including British) suppliers of tankers and insurance will be banned from providing services to vessels ferrying crude oil from Russia to non-EU countries. To ensure the ban does not decimate Russian exports and spark an oil-price shock, America proposed that such services could be made available to non-EU countries so long as they purchased seaborne Russian oil below an agreed price cap. After months of wrangling, on Friday the G7 club of rich countries, Australia and the EU agreed to a cap of $60 a barrel. But with Russia refusing to abide by any cap, it is too soon for the West to declare victory.

Transatlantic trade troubles

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Europe has long urged America to do more in the fight against climate change. Now that it has, the EU is not happy. The bloc fears that President Joe Biden is following an “America First”, rather than a climate-first, approach. The Inflation Reduction Act, Mr Biden’s flagship policy, offers green incentives worth $400bn, but includes protectionist subsidies on key products like electric cars. On Monday a meeting in Washington between the EU and the Biden administration could offer hints on how the pair hope to resolve the dispute.

The text of the law says that exceptions can be applied only to countries with which the United States has a free-trade agreement; America has no such deal with the EU. On Sunday the European Commission’s president, Ursula von der Leyen, warned that the bloc must “adapt” its own state-aid rules in the face of America’s green subsidies. Not a good sign for the meeting.

Free speech v gay rights at SCOTUS

PHOTO: REUTERS
Four years after sidestepping the crux of a dispute between a gay couple and a Christian baker who refused to make them a wedding cake, America’s Supreme Court is taking another crack at the subject. On Monday the justices will examine the case of 303 Creative v Elenis. The question is: does the First Amendment protect a web designer who says her beliefs about marriage preclude her from creating websites for gay weddings?

Lorie Smith, the designer, says “sacred freedoms of thought and mind” bar the state of Colorado from forcing her to create messages that clash with her beliefs. The state counters that the law only requires Ms Smith to supply gay customers with the same services she offers straight ones. She could insist on selling only websites containing “biblical passages stating that marriage is a union of one man and one woman” as long as she sells them “to everyone”. Tricky questions at the heart of America’s culture wars await: if a business can refuse to carry out work involving same-sex weddings, why not interracial ones, too?

China’s faltering economy

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Monday China’s central bank will free up 500bn yuan ($72bn) for lending within the banking system, after announcing a 25-basis-point cut to the required reserve ratio, the amount of money banks are required to hold as reserves. In recent years the People’s Bank of China has routinely cut RRR to encourage banks to lend more. The hope is that there will be takers for the extra credit, but demand has been lacklustre in China’s decelerating economy. Covid restrictions have caused companies great uncertainty. Many planned investments in factories or new shops have been axed. In October new loans declined to 615bn yuan, 211bn yuan less than a year ago.

That is worrying for the government, which in its quest for growth wants companies to expand operations and build factories. Until China fixes its covid problem, RRR cuts might amount to little more than pushing on a string.


Picking the word of the year

PHOTO: ALAMY
At this time of year, as others are trimming Christmas trees, a clutch of dictionary publishers ponder their choice for word of the year. Oxford Dictionaries will publish their choice on Monday, having chosen three finalists which, for the first time, were put to a public vote.

One is “goblin mode”, a state in which someone indulges their laziest or most self-indulgent habits—perhaps suitable as a symbol for the first proper post-lockdown year. Another is “#IStandWith”, a hashtag used frequently in solidarity on Twitter but whose status as a word seems questionable. The third is the “metaverse”, which Meta (owner of Facebook) and other companies have poured fortunes into developing—but which few people seem to be actually spending time in. It has been a strange year: war, economic upheaval and a pandemic hangover are hard to sum up in a single dictionary entry. Perhaps 2023 will bring better news, and more inspiring words.

It is in the character of growth that we should learn from both pleasant and unpleasant experiences.

Nelson Mandela
