The world in brief April 24, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (05:13 GMT+1 London)

The leaders of America, Australia, India and Japan are winding up a high-stakes gathering of “the Quad” in Tokyo, in the wake of the White House’s equivocating its stance towards Taiwan. The spectre of China’s might cast other shadows besides, as mutual policies concerning covid vaccines and climate change were raised. Joe Biden also announced a new 13-country trade bloc, an ersatz replacement for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and denounced Russia’s invasion of Ukraine while the prime minister of India—which has avoided taking a side—stood by.

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, called for “maximum sanctions” against Russia during his televised speech at the World Economic Forum in Davos. He asked foreign powers to impose an embargo on Russian oil and block the country’s banks from global financial networks. Russia’s diplomats and oligarchs were not invited to the annual gathering of business elites in Switzerland.

A Russian diplomat to the United Nations quit in protest over the “aggressive war unleashed” by Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. Boris Bondarev’s resignation is a rare glimpse of dissatisfaction among Russia’s diplomatic elite with the war in Ukraine. The government has sought to crack down on dissent and control the narrative relating to its invasion.

Airbnb will stop offering rental homes in China, partly because of the country’s “zero-covid” policy. The company had been struggling there even before the pandemic. It will instead focus on catering to Chinese residents travelling abroad. Separately Starbucks, an American coffee chain, said it was ending its 15-year presence in Russia because of the war in Ukraine.

Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s president, sacked the CEO of Petrobras, the national oil giant, just a month after appointing him. It is the third such dismissal during Mr Bolsonaro’s tenure. As elections approach, he has grown frustrated with Petrobras’s insistence of keeping fuel prices in line with global levels amid soaring inflation.

Christine Lagarde, the president of the European Central Bank, said she expects to abandon negative interest rates by the end of September. Ms Lagarde’s statement fuelled expectations of rate increases at two policy meetings scheduled for July and September. The euro rose against the dollar to its highest level in almost a month following her comments.

More than 1,000 people in Iraq have been hospitalised with respiratory problems as another sandstorm swept through the country. The storm, which is the ninth since mid-April, has bathed Baghdad, the capital, in an eerie orange light and caused cars to desert the roads. The government closed public buildings and airports on Monday.

Fact of the day: 15.9%, how much the value of the average house in America has increased by in the past year. Read the full story.

Correction: In Friday’s edition of Espresso, we published a cartoon featuring the Hungarian flag. While the colours of the flag were correct, they were in the wrong order. Sorry.

