The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (04:23 GMT / 12:23 Hong Kong)

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, met with President Joe Biden in the White House and gave an address to Congress. The trip marks the first time Mr Zelensky has left his country since Russia invaded in February. Mr Biden pledged to keep strengthening Ukraine’s ability to defend itself, particularly its air defence, and announced a further $1.85bn in security assistance for Ukraine.

Donald Trump paid $1.1m in federal income taxes during his first three years as president and nothing in 2020, when he reported large losses from his businesses, according to a summary of six years of his tax returns. The disclosure follows a lengthy legal battle by Democratic lawmakers to unseal the financial records that Mr Trump has shielded. The Supreme Court ruled in November that they could be released.

Lawyers for Sam Bankman-Fried, the founder of FTX, a failed cryptocurrency exchange, told a court in the Bahamas on Wednesday that their client had agreed to extradition to the United States. He boarded a plane to New York hours later. Mr Bankman-Fried has been charged with eight crimes, including wire fraud against customers, lenders and investors, as well as conspiracies to commit money-laundering and commodities and securities fraud.

Benjamin Netanyahu narrowly made the deadline to form a new government in Israel. His six-party coalition will be made up of far-right and ultra-Orthodox partners. It will be the most right-wing administration in the country’s history. Once ratified by Israel’s parliament, the new deal will return Mr Netanyahu to power after he was ousted last year.

Elon Musk said that he will step down as CEO of Twitter as soon as he finds someone “foolish enough” to take the job. He had asked Twitter users if he should stay. Of the 17m who responded, 57.5% said he should quit. Mr Musk, who has managed the firm controversially since he bought it in October, said he will continue to run the company’s engineering teams.

Britain’s ambulance workers went on strike on Wednesday, a day after nurses walked out. The health secretary, Steve Barclay, said ambulance unions had made a “conscious choice” to harm patients. Despite contingency plans some emergency calls would go unanswered. In France planned strikes by railroad workers have forced the cancellation of a third of high-speed-train services over the Christmas weekend.

Japan’s two-year sovereign bond yields bobbed above zero on Wednesday for the first time since 2015. The rise was prompted by a surprising decision on Tuesday by the country’s doveish central bank to lift its cap on ten-year bond yields, which caused the yen to surge. The move heralds a tighter monetary policy in the world’s third-largest economy—as well as the coming end of the global era of negative yields.

Fact of the day: 10%, the estimated reduction in income for being obese, according to research from America, Britain, Canada and Denmark. Read the full story.

2022 in review: The worldwide cost-of-living crisis

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week we are looking back on 2022. Today, finance and economics

In 2021, following government splurges in response to the pandemic, many economists believed temporary inflation was inescapable. Few expected what unfolded. In 2022 inflation rates in many countries soared into double digits. Global inflation for 2022 is expected to be 8.8%, according to the IMF. In poor countries, the UN estimates that rising prices may have pushed 71m people into poverty. Those in rich countries, such as Britain, also felt the squeeze.

Big central banks, led by America’s Federal Reserve, were forced into action, implementing the fastest and biggest interest-rate increases since the 1980s. In recent weeks inflation has decelerated, primarily because energy prices have fallen and supply chains are operating more smoothly. That will reduce the pace of central banks’ interest-rate rises, but they will still have to be vigilant. Tight labour markets, loose fiscal policy and turbulent energy markets will continue to push prices higher.


2022 in review: A new normal for investors

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
After the global financial crisis of 2007-09, as interest rates fell and stayed low, asset prices surged and a “bull market in everything” took hold. In 2022 rising interest rates and runaway inflation put a painful end to that. At its lowest point of the year, the S&P 500 index of leading American shares had lost more than $10trn in market value. Government bonds, usually a shelter from stocks, have also been hit. Meanwhile, house prices are falling everywhere from Vancouver to Sydney.

This year’s capital losses, however, have a silver lining. If the downside of higher asset prices was lower expected returns then, by symmetry, future real returns have now gone up. Investors need to change their approach to markets. The new regime of higher interest rates and scarcer capital may seem like a shock, but for much of history these were the normal conditions for investors. It was the era of cheap money that was weird.

2022 in review: The unlikely economic winners

PHOTO: NURPHOTO VIA GETTY IMAGES
It has been a rough year for almost everyone. Inflation has been rampant; markets have been in turmoil. Yet this poor aggregate performance hides wide differences: some countries have done pretty well. The Economist has ranked 34 mostly rich countries on five economic and financial indicators, including GDP, inflation and stockmarket performance. The ranking finds especially bright spots in the Mediterranean.

Top of our list is Greece. Other countries that plumbed the economic depths in the early 2010s, such as Portugal and Spain, also score highly, thanks to the lifting of covid lockdowns and a recovery in tourism. Two Baltic countries, Estonia and Latvia, which won plaudits in the 2010s for speedy reforms but rely on Russia for energy, come bottom.

Still, the gap between 2022’s winners and losers may not persist in 2023. Before long, growth in southern Europe, weighed down by rapidly ageing populations and high debts, will surely fall back to less stellar levels.


2022 in review: The collapse of crypto

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
It has been a terrible year for cryptocurrencies. In May Terra-Luna, a decentralised stablecoin system, worth around $40bn at its peak, collapsed, taking some $200bn off the market capitalisation of crypto with it. That led to the demise of other lending platforms and a hedge fund, wiping out another $200bn. Then came the biggest shock. In November FTX, the third-largest crypto trading platform at the time, filed for bankruptcy. The exchange is accused of lending customer funds to Alameda, a trading firm also owned by the once-feted Sam Bankman-Fried which allegedly then used the funds to make risky bets. The revelations sparked contagion and other big crypto firms collapsed.

As with previous crypto winters, there were existential questions about the utility of crypto. Many speculated that FTX’s implosion could kill the entire market. That may be far-fetched. As bad a year as they have had, cryptocurrencies' market capitalisation is currently around $900bn, still 50% more than the value five years ago.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which newspaper title is shared by publications in Boston, Miami and Albany, Georgia?

Wednesday: Which female character is the focus of the Truman Capote novella “Breakfast at Tiffany’s”?

Try again. Fail again. Fail better.

Samuel Beckett
