The world in brief
September 20, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, told the leaders gathered at the UN General Assembly in New York that Russia was seeking to attack the “international rules-based order”, and was weaponising Ukraine’s land, people and resources to do so. Earlier Joe Biden, America’s president, condemned Russia’s “naked aggression” and pledged to work towards a “diplomatic resolution” to bring peace to Ukraine. The main focus of the week-long UNGA is reviving the Sustainable Development Goals.

Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, said there were “credible allegations” that Indian government agents were involved in the fatal shooting of Hardeep Singh Nijjar, a Sikh leader and Canadian citizen, in British Columbia in June. Mr Nijjar, labelled a “terrorist” by India, had supported the establishment of a Sikh separatist state in northern India. India called the accusations “absurd”.

France called for an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council to discuss unrest in Nagorno-Karabakh after Azerbaijan launched “counter-terror operations” against Armenian separatists in the enclave. A fragile peace, brokered in 2020 after a war in which Azerbaijan retook territory from ethnic Armenians, looks under threat. Karabakh separatist officials claimed that two civilians had been killed and 138 injured.

Shares in Instacart, a grocery-delivery firm, closed the day up 12% at $33.70 each on America’s Nasdaq exchange. The company is now valued at around $11bn. The listing is another boost to America’s IPO market, which has been moribund for much of the year. Last week Arm, a British chip designer, enjoyed a blockbuster debut on Nasdaq.

Fighting broke out between government forces and militias in Port Sudan, a city on Sudan’s east coast thus far insulated from the violence of the civil war. Port Sudan hosts the country’s only functioning airport. In neighbouring South Sudan a faction of the ruling party walked out of parliament, accusing the government of compromising the fairness of elections due next year.

A cargo vessel carrying grain left a Ukrainian port on the Black Sea for the first time since July, when Russia pulled out of a deal to ensure safe passage for shipments of crops and fertiliser. Russian drones attacked Lviv, setting an industrial warehouse in the western Ukrainian city on fire. Saying more attacks were expected, officials urged residents to stay at home.

Researchers from France and Germany will present a new proposal on EU enlargement to officials from the bloc in Brussels. The paper contains ideas on how the EU can bring more countries into its fold, including reforms to key institutions and expanding the bloc’s budget. Current candidates include Ukraine, Moldova, Serbia and a number of other Balkan countries.

Figure of the day: 210m, the number of unique visits to ChatGPT in May, its busiest month this year. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
A new war breaks out in Europe
Three years after the last war over Nagorno-Karabakh, the region is again waking to the sounds of bombs and gunfire. On Tuesday, after months of tensions, Azerbaijan launched an offensive against the besieged enclave, recognised internationally as part of its own territory but populated exclusively by Armenians. Officials in Armenia accuse the government in Baku of launching a campaign of ethnic cleansing. Azerbaijan insists it is only targeting armed Armenian separatists. “They should disarm themselves and raise the white flag,” says an adviser to Azerbaijan’s president.

A prolonged war could turn into a humanitarian catastrophe. But few outside powers seem willing to help put an end to the fighting. Russia, formally Armenia’s ally, has stepped aside. One reason is the war in Ukraine, which has bogged down its troops. Another is Armenia’s recent attempt to reduce its dependence on Moscow and improve relations with America. Vladimir Putin may be out to punish Armenia. Innocent people will pay the price.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A deadly disease in India
On Wednesday a team of experts are set to conclude an investigation into an outbreak of the Nipah virus in Kerala, a state in the south of India. In August Kerala confirmed its fourth spate of the disease since 2018. The virus, first identified in Malaysia in 1998 and spread by fruit bats, can infect pigs and people. It is rare but deadly: the World Health Organisation estimates that Nipah causes fatal brain inflammation in 40-75% of human cases.

So far two people have died in Kerala’s current wave, with a further four receiving medical treatment and several dozen quarantined. Kerala’s health service—superior to most in India—has quashed previous outbreaks through mass testing and by isolating cases. Along with a large population of bats, strict surveillance has probably contributed to Kerala’s unusual number of recorded outbreaks: those elsewhere may simply go undetected. Public-health experts are fretting over the possibility of highly transmissible mutations of the virus causing a pandemic. Closer attention is needed.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Has the Fed reached its rates peak?
The Federal Reserve may finally be done raising interest rates. On Wednesday, at the end of a regular meeting, America’s central bank is widely expected to say it will stand pat on rates for now. That would mark the second time in three meetings it has opted to stay still. Given the direction of economic data—inflation is slowing and the labour market softening—it may also mean that the Fed’s next big move will, in fact, be to lower rates, possibly around mid-2024.

But do not expect the central bank to declare victory over inflation just yet. Investors will scrutinise its quarterly projections, also due on Wednesday, in which many officials will probably indicate that they favour another rate rise before the end of this year (even if they do not follow through on that desire). The hope is that hawkish talk now will enable the Fed to bring its tightening cycle to an earlier conclusion.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
France rolls out the red carpet for King Charles
Britain’s monarch will arrive in France on Wednesday for a three-day state visit with full pomp. The trip was postponed from March, when rioting against President Emmanuel Macron’s pension reform raised security concerns. Now republican France is preparing for royal mania, starting with a banquet for King Charles and Queen Camilla at the former royal palace of Versailles. On Thursday the king will give a speech, with a soupçon in French, to members of both houses of parliament. He will then visit Notre Dame, still under renovation after the fire in 2019, before taking a trip to Bordeaux.

King Charles’s visit is a non-political way to show that cross-channel relations are improving. Last year the two countries were at odds over fish, migrants, borders and more. But Mr Macron and the king are said to have already forged a warm bond. France's population seems amenable, too: 71% told pollsters that they thought well of the royal family.


PHOTO: MRINALINI MUKHERJEE ARCHIVE / AA
The rigorous creativity of Mrinalini Mukherjee
Mrinalini Mukherjee’s work is often characterised as being the product of feeling, not thought. The shows of the Indian artist, who died in 2015, are described as “intuitive” or “organic”. The monumental soft sculptures for which Mukherjee is most famous—woven from heavy rope bundles that she found in New Delhi Markets in the 1970s—certainly have a strange, dreamlike quality. They dangle from ceilings, folding and bulging. They are made using ancient hand-knotting techniques, which is more often associated with poor Indian weavers than fine art.

But a new exhibition, opening at the Asia Art Archives in Hong Kong on Wednesday, upends this folksy conception of Mukherjee. The pieces are still shifting and vegetal, but the display catalogues an extraordinary precision. Mukherjee’s highly detailed assembly notes fill the space; walls of her photographs demonstrate her obsessive record-keeping. The show argues, convincingly, that Mukherjee’s art was as much the result of precision as passion.


Daily Quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which rock star had backing bands called “The Revolution” and the “New Power Generation”?

Tuesday: Which cult 1960s TV series featured a protagonist known only as number 6?

I aimed at the public’s heart, and by accident I hit it in the stomach.

Upton Sinclair
