The world in brief
March 30, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Sergio Ermotti returned as chief executive of UBS to manage its takeover of Credit Suisse. Mr Ermotti led Switzerland’s largest lender for nine years before resigning in 2020. The Swiss national and current chairman of Swiss Re, a reinsurer, replaces Ralph Hamers, a Dutchman. The $3.25bn tie-up concluded the bewildering fall of Credit Suisse, when depositors and counterparties abandoned the unprofitable bank over the course of a working week in March.

Ukrainian missiles hit Russian-occupied parts of their country, destroying a rail depot and knocking out electricity in the southern city of Melitopol. The strikes come amid growing speculation that Ukraine will soon launch its spring counter-offensive. Meanwhile, Rafael Grossi, the head of the UN’s nuclear watchdog, arrived at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear station, currently held by Russia, calling for a deal to protect the plant.

America’s Senate repealed two resolutions that authorised the country’s invasions of Iraq in 1991 and 2003. In particular, the 2002 Authorisation for the Use of Military Force in effect handed broad war powers to the president: it was later used to justify airstrikes against Islamic State and a lethal drone strike on an Iranian commander. The bill must next clear the House of Representatives.

After three days of fractious negotiations Germany’s ruling coalition hashed out a new set of policies on climate protection and infrastructure investment. The agreement includes a plan to modernise the country’s railway network and levy a carbon tax on German trucks. But a ban on oil and gas heaters, hoped for by the Green party, was shelved and next year’s budget has yet to be agreed upon.

China threatened unspecified retaliation if Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, meets with Kevin McCarthy, the House speaker, in America. Ms Tsai is stopping over in New York before moving on to Belize and Guatemala, two of the dwindling number of countries that maintain diplomatic relations with the island. She may meet Mr McCarthy on her way back. China said a meeting “would harm [its] sovereignty”. It considers Taiwan its own.

A group of artificial intelligence experts and Elon Musk, the owner of Tesla, signed an open letter calling for a six-month halt to AI development. They argue that AI systems should be developed only when their effects are positive. The release of ChatGPT, OpenAI’s wildly popular chatbot, last year sparked a race between rival AI labs which the letter says is now out of control.

The government of Serdar Berdymukhamedov, Turkmenistan’s president, announced they will spend $5bn on building a new city in honour of his predecessor, Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov, who also happens to be his father. Named Arkadag, or “protector”, a title of the older Berdymukhamedov, its architects are unlikely to spare any expense. They are under strict instructions to get Arkadag into the “Guinness Book of Records”.

Fact of the day: 77kg, the amount of rice the average Asian consumes a year according to the UN. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Erdogan’s best hope in Turkey’s elections
Turkey’s presidential race kicked off in earnest after four men were confirmed by the electoral commission on Monday as candidates. They include the incumbent, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and the man Turkey’s opposition has settled on as its umbrella candidate, Kemal Kilicdaroglu. The election, due on May 14th, could be the toughest of Mr Erdogan’s career; opinion polls give Mr Kilicdaroglu a lead of at least four points.

The strongman suffered another setback recently when Turkey’s main Kurdish party announced it would not field its own candidate for the presidency, suggesting it would endorse Mr Kilicdaroglu. Mr Erdogan’s best hope of splitting the opposition vote may now lie with Muharrem Ince, leader of the newly formed nationalist Homeland party and a former candidate for Mr Kilicdaroglu’s Republican People’s Party in the 2018 presidential elections. Mr Ince has no chance of winning this year’s contest, but may steal votes from his former boss in the first round. Mr Erdogan will be wishing him the best of luck.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Chinese banks face their own strains
Chinese banks had it hard in 2022. The country’s zero-covid policy meant people spent more time at home and less time shopping. That in turn meant business-owners took out fewer loans for fear of being forced to close in a lockdown. In July many homebuyers stopped paying their mortgages because the completion of their flats had been delayed. Yet by the end of the year low interest rates had inspired many to repay their mortgages early, depriving banks of the certainty of this long-term revenue stream.

These pressures will be reflected in the earnings of China’s four state-owned megabanks, which report successively on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. China’s largest lenders are well capitalised, and do not face the challenges rocking some of their counterparts in America and Europe. But dovish monetary policy is one among several factors that may cause a decline in their return on equity, a measure of profitability, this year. The returns on equity for Bank of China, which reports on Thursday, may slip from 11.1% in 2022 to 10.5% this year.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
The return of Bolsonaro
Brazil’s former president, Jair Bolsonaro, is coming home. After almost three months in the US in self-imposed exile, possibly prolonged by legal problems at home, the populist far-right leader will arrive on Thursday in Brasília, the capital. While he was away, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the new left-wing president, took office. In early January, thousands of bolsonaristas refused to accept Lula’s victory and stormed Congress and the presidential palace. Mr Bolsonaro is being investigated by the Federal Police for inciting the insurrection. He also faces more inquiries, by the Supreme Court and electoral authorities, relating, for instance, to spreading false information at the last election.

Mr Bolsonaro says he is going to lead opposition and one of his sons, a senator, said it is “natural” that Mr Bolsonaro will run for the presidency again in 2026. If he is found guilty of trying to subvert the last election, however, it could scupper his plans. Even so, his influence may persist: his other two sons are also far-right politicians, and his wife is president of the women’s group of his party. The 58m Brazilians who voted for him last year may have another Bolsonaro to vote for next time.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Worries for democracy in Senegal
Senegal’s reputation as a beacon of democracy and stability in west Africa is quickly eroding. On Thursday Ousmane Sonko, a leading opposition figure who rails against tax evasion and criticises France’s influence, is scheduled to appear in court in a defamation case filed by a government minister. A conviction on this charge, or for a separate accusation of rape by a massage-parlour employee, could render him ineligible to run for president in elections next February.

Mr Sonko’s supporters argue that these cases, like those against other rivals who were blocked at the last election in 2019, are politically motivated. President Macky Sall, they say, wants a constitution-busting third term and is keen not to be troubled by rivals. Mr Sall, who has built roads but struggled to tame unemployment, reckons that his first term should not count towards the constitutional two-term limit, because the constitution was later amended to reduce the term lengths from seven years to five.

Meanwhile, repression is ramping up. Police have arrested journalists and perhaps as many as 400 opposition party members. All this is fuelling protests and violent clashes with police. More are sure to come.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Revising baseball’s rulebook
Opening Day is a holiday for America’s baseball faithful. Some diehard fans will even skive off work on Thursday to see their team’s first outing of the Major League Baseball season. And this year three rule changes make their primetime debut. Pitchers now have less time to throw to batters; the bases are bigger, and so closer together; and infielders—those trying to catch out batters—must stay on the infield dirt when the pitch is released.

The new rules are designed to energise a game that had started to grow dull. Games regularly used to take more than three hours, and action was scarce. Number-crunching has transformed baseball in recent years, allowing infielders, for example, to anticipate where the ball may be hit—and position themselves accordingly. Stealing bases, which is dramatic to watch but risky, fell out of fashion.

The early signs are positive. The average spring training game this year was nearly 30 minutes shorter than last year, more bases were stolen, and more runs scored. Not everyone is reform-minded: baseball’s reputation as America’s traditional pastime encourages conservatism among some fans. Yet MLB seems finally to be embracing change. Batter up!


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Wednesday: Which Irish county contains the Dingle peninsula and the Macgillycuddy’s Reeks mountains?

Tuesday: Which library classification system was originally devised in 1876?

Great things are done by a series of small things brought together

Vincent van Gogh
