The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (04:10 GMT+1 / 11:10 Hong Kong)

Donald Trump said FBI agents had raided his Mar-a-Lago home and prised open a safe. The raid is reportedly connected to a complaint raised earlier this year by the National Archives that 15 boxes of documents from Mr Trump’s time as president, including classified material, had been removed to his Florida home. The FBI’s action ramps up the legal pressure on Mr Trump, who is being investigated on several fronts, not for least his part in the insurrection in Washington, DC on January 6th 2021. Mr Trump blamed “Radical Left Democrats” trying to thwart another presidential run.

Russia said it would suspend American inspections of its nuclear weapons under the New START treaty, and blamed Western sanctions for making the process too difficult. The treaty is the only remaining nuclear-arms agreement between America and Russia. It limits the number of weapons they can deploy, and allows each country to inspect the other’s arsenal. The treaty expires in 2026, though President Joe Biden wants to negotiate a replacement.

Israel reopened border crossings into the Gaza Strip, as a truce between Israel and Palestinian militants, which came into effect on Sunday, appeared to be holding. Fuel trucks moved into Gaza, relieving a severe power shortage. Israeli air strikes on the enclave killed 44 people over three days of fighting last week, including two leaders of Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a militant group.

Ukrainian staff at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant are “working under the barrels of Russian guns”, Ukraine’s ambassador to the UN’s nuclear watchdog said on Monday. He called for an international mission to the facility, which was reportedly damaged by Russian shelling over the weekend. Meanwhile Ukrainian troops claimed to have retaken the Russian-occupied town of Dovhenke, to south of Kharkiv, the regional capital which they are trying to encircle.

Greg and Travis McMichael, the father and son who shot dead Ahmaud Arbery in 2020, received life sentences on hate-crime charges, in addition to their existing life sentences for murder. William Bryan, the third person involved, was given an additional 35 years in prison. Arbery, a black man, was chased and shot by his white assailants while jogging through a mostly white neighbourhood in Georgia.

America’s Federal Aviation Administration said Boeing could soon resume shipments of its 787 Dreamliner jets, nearly two years after deliveries were first halted because of manufacturing flaws. The announcement is welcome news for the firm following a few bumpy years—owing to the grounding of its 737 MAX planes after two fatal crashes, and disruptions to air travel during the pandemic.

Novavax, an American vaccine-maker, cut its annual revenue forecast by half on Monday, to $2bn-2.3bn, because of weak demand for its covid-19 jab. Novavax’s vaccine, which uses fragments similar to the virus that causes covid-19, was authorised for adults by America’s Food and Drug Administration in July. But it has not yet been approved for children or teens.

Fact of the day: 59%, the share of Kansans who voted to preserve abortion rights in the state. Read the full story.

Will crime hit Ilhan Omar in Minneapolis?

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Four states are holding primary elections on Tuesday, ahead of the mid-terms in November. But it is perhaps Minnesota—specifically its fifth congressional district, which includes its biggest city, Minneapolis—which offers the greatest chance for a surprise. That is because of voters worried about crime.

Since the summer of 2020, when George Floyd was murdered by a city police officer, policing has remained a burning issue. But attitudes have changed as crime—particularly shootings and carjacking—has soared nationwide.

Ilhan Omar, a hyper-progressive Democratic congresswoman (and a founding member of “the squad”), may be on the losing side of the shift in attitudes. She has been an enthusiastic proponent of defunding the police, proposing to abolish Minneapolis’s police department. In November voters soundly rejected that idea. And Tuesday’s primary gives them a chance to replace Ms Omar with Don Samuels, a former city-council member who has campaigned heavily on the issue of crime. Ms Omar is still the favourite to win—but an upset is not out of the question.

A new president for Kenya

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Kenya has been a multi-party democracy for 30 years. Its record of success is patchy. Elections in 2002 were a joyful affair, but a disputed vote in 2007 was followed by ethnic violence. Kenyans trudging to elect their fifth president on Tuesday will have a weariness in their step. That has much to do with the unprepossessing candidates.

Raila Odinga, just about the front-runner, came second in the last three presidential elections he contested. But his alliance with the unpopular outgoing president, Uhuru Kenyatta, tarnished his reputation—and Mr Kenyatta has struggled to persuade his tribe, the Kikuyu, to support Mr Odinga. His main rival is William Ruto, the current deputy president. Jilted by Mr Kenyatta, Mr Ruto’s populist campaign has tapped into Kenyans’ discontent.

Extravagant election promises, such as universal health care, will be difficult to fund and have met indifference. Many young Kenyans have not even bothered to register to vote. The victor will have to deal with a sullen electorate and a struggling economy. Perhaps Kenya has reached political maturity after all.

Inflation in emerging markets

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Brazil and China are at opposite ends of the famous BRICs acronym, first coined by Goldman Sachs, a bank, to refer to four of the biggest emerging markets. The two giants are also at opposite ends of the global inflation cycle.

Brazil’s central bank was one of the first to react to the danger of rising prices. It began raising interest rates in March 2021 and has battled inflation furiously since. In June the country’s annual inflation rate reached 11.9%. New inflation figures on Tuesday could show signs that price growth is finally peaking.

In China, which is suffering a prolonged property slump and intermittent virus-fighting lockdowns, economic overheating has seemed a distant worry. But new figures on Wednesday could show long dormant inflation beginning to stir, finally threatening the government’s 3% target. When it comes to inflation, these two emerging—yet diverging—economies could finish the year a little closer to each other.

The people choosing Britain’s next prime minister

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
What is a Tory? Once the question was answered with comic references to pink faces and pinker trousers. The humour has faded. In the past four years, Conservative Party members have twice chosen Britain’s prime minister. After Boris Johnson announced his resignation in July, they are being called upon once again. On Tuesday they will gather in Darlington in north-east England, the latest stop on a tour by Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak, the candidates seeking to woo them. By the end of the week members will have received their postal ballots, due back by September 2nd.

No one knows exactly how many Tory party members there are; it is thought to be around 160,000. They are overwhelmingly male, old and white. At hustings they are polite, if prone to the odd harrumph. Some are attracted by the “bonkers” nature of Ms Truss, the foreign secretary and favourite to beat Mr Sunak, the former chancellor. And many do, in fact, wear pink trousers.


Philip Larkin at 100

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
By the time the poet Philip Larkin died in 1985, his best lines enjoyed wide currency in modern Britain. An elegant and accessible craftsman, bleakly humorous and free of illusions, he seemed perfectly attuned to the details of suburban melancholy. But when his letters were published in 1992, they exposed seams of misogyny, racism and puerility. His reputation wobbled, yet recovered: in 2008 the Times, a British newspaper, hailed him as the greatest British writer since 1945.

As admirers mark the centenary of Larkin’s birth on Tuesday, his faults are again under the microscope. This time they are magnified by academics eager to reshape the literary canon. Traditional types complain that any move to cut him from school poetry anthologies is vandalism. Even his most ardent fans admit that his interests are narrow. But his rueful reflections on boredom and romantic disappointment still prove consoling for some. Despite the controversy, he remains the unofficial laureate of humdrum Englishness.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which Maine-based retailer, founded in 1912, is famous for its outdoor clothing and equipment?

Monday: Who was Richard Nixon’s first attorney-general, who went to prison for his role in the Watergate scandal?

Life is first boredom, then fear

Philip Larkin
