The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

December 31, 2022

Thousands of pages of Donald Trump’s tax returns for 2015-20 were made public on Friday, providing detail about the finances of Mr Trump and his businesses while he was president. Mr Trump and his wife paid net income taxes of $641,931 in 2015; $750 in 2016; $750 in 2017; $999,466 in 2018; $133,445 in 2019; and $0 in 2020. Last week the Democrat-controlled House Ways and Means Committee voted to release the records before Republicans take control of the chamber on January 3rd. As president Mr Trump broke precedent by refusing to share details of his tax affairs.

Residents of Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, were told to head to air-raid shelters amid a Russian aerial assault. According to the region’s governor, Russia launched an “attack by drones” in the early hours of Friday morning. Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said his country’s forces had shot down 54 Russian missiles on Thursday. Meanwhile Mr Zelensky’s adviser said Russia is holding more than 3,000 prisoners of war.

Belarus summoned Ukraine’s ambassador after a missile was downed 15km inside Belarusian territory. Belarus, a Russian ally, demanded an inquiry. Ukraine’s army said the missile was part of its air defences. But the defence ministry did not rule out a “deliberate provocation” by Russia. In November NATO concluded that a missile that hit a farm in Poland was fired by Ukraine.

European health officials said covid-19 restrictions on travellers from China were unjustified. According to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Europeans have high levels of protection against covid and the risk of imported infections is low. Several countries, including America, Japan and Italy, have announced that travellers from China will have to produce a negative covid-19 test on arrival.

Digital assets worth $3.5bn belonging to FTX, a bankrupt crypto exchange, are being held by the Securities Commission of the Bahamas. The tokens were transferred to the commission in November to be redistributed to customers and creditors, according to a statement released by the SCB on Thursday. FTX’s boss, Sam Bankman-Fried, faces eight criminal charges including defrauding investors.

Aung San Suu Kyi, Myanmar’s former leader, had seven years added to her prison sentence, bringing the total to 33. Since a military coup ousted the democratically elected Ms Suu Kyi in February 2021, she has been convicted of a variety of trumped-up offences, most recently corruption. The UN Security Council recently passed a resolution calling for her release.

Canada’s competition tribunal approved a merger between Rogers Communications and Shaw Communications that would create the country’s second-biggest telecom provider. The proposed deal, worth $14.8bn, had been blocked initially because of fears over decreased competition and higher prices, but the tribunal dismissed such concerns. The transaction will still require approval from Canada’s government.

Word of the week: masyarakat adat, an Indonesian word for ethnic groups, such as the Baduy, who shun modernity. Read the full story.

2023 in preview: A feast of great art shows

PHOTO: RIJKSMUSEUM
This week we have been looking ahead to the big stories of 2023. This weekend, culture. Regular Espresso service will resume on Tuesday

The blockbuster art shows of 2023 will be in Amsterdam and London. In February the Rijksmuseum will put on the largest-ever show of Johannes Vermeer’s work, bringing together 27 of his 35 surviving paintings. The show will also reveal the master’s method through scientific studies of “The Milkmaid”, painted in 1660. In March, meanwhile, “After Impressionism” opens at the National Gallery, bringing together Cézanne, Van Gogh, Klimt, Matisse, Munch, Picasso and Rodin to explore how styles such as Cubism and Expressionism developed in cities across Europe.

New institutions are opening, too. Seoul gets the Robot & AI Museum: as well as being exhibited, robots have been involved in the building’s design, manufacturing and construction. In January the International African-American Museum will open in Charleston, South Carolina, on the site of a wharf where 100,000 enslaved Africans disembarked from ships. A spiritual sibling, the Pan African Heritage Museum, in Ghana, will also open in 2023. Its design resembles a horn, an instrument often used to herald the arrival of something, or someone, special.

2023 in preview: An enticing variety of new films

PHOTO: JASON MCDONALD/NETFLIX
Film buffs will have plenty to watch in 2023. There are adaptations of Alice Walker’s “The Color Purple”, Kristin Hannah’s “The Nightingale” and Roald Dahl’s “The Wonderful Story of Henry Sugar”. Martin Scorsese will direct Leonardo DiCaprio and Robert De Niro in “Killers of the Flower Moon”, about the murders of Osage tribespeople in Oklahoma in the 1920s. For action fans a doddery Harrison Ford, now in his 80s, will return for a fifth “Indiana Jones” film.

There will be a surfeit of biographical drama, too. Dustin Lance Black has written the script for “Rustin”, a film about Bayard Rustin, a gay civil-rights activist who organised the March on Washington in 1963. Bradley Cooper will star as Leonard Bernstein, a revered composer and conductor, in “Maestro”. And Cillian Murphy will take on the role of Robert Oppenheimer, the father of the atomic bomb. Meanwhile, Margot Robbie plays one of the world’s most famous fictional women, in “Barbie”.

2023 in preview: The cricket World Cup

PHOTO: AP
In October, ten teams will meet in India for cricket’s one-day game World Cup. It will be one of the glitziest events the sport has ever seen.

The millions of Indians who watch televised cricket make for a hugely valuable audience. In 2022 online streaming rights alone to the domestic Indian Premier League cost Reliance, an Indian oil-to-retail behemoth, $2.6bn. Players are paid handsomely, too. So for foreign cricketers, including those from England, which won the last tournament in 2019, the World Cup will be both an opportunity for national glory and an audition for a life-changing contract.

Indian money is changing how the game is played as well as watched. Many Indian fans prefer the two-hour “T20” format used in the IPL to the one-day cricket played at the World Cup, or to traditional five-day Test matches. The longer formats are therefore retreating before the juggernaut of Indian-organised T20 tournaments. Two T20 leagues will launch (with Indian-owned teams) in 2023. Many fans of the older, more stately versions of the game dread such developments.

2023 in preview: Words of the year

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
What coinages might you expect to hear in 2023? For more, read the full story

eSIM: technology that replaces the physical SIM in your phone with digital codes that can be zapped from an old handset to a new one.

Mixed reality: technology that allows real and virtual items to interact, such as a game of table tennis with real paddles and a computer generated ball.

Aridification: the long-term drying of a region; a term applied when “drought,” or even “megadrought,” are no longer sufficient.

Synfuels and e-fuels: replacements for conventional hydrocarbons that are produced artificially rather than from oil.

Productivity paranoia: an affliction of home workers afraid of being seen as shirkers, and bosses afraid that home-workers are indeed shirking.

TWaT city: one where many commuters travel to the office only on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays.

Battery belt: a green-friendly revitalised form of America’s “Rust Belt” through investment in industries such as electric-car manufacturing and “gigafactories” that make batteries for electric cars.

Vertiport: where multirotor drones that are large enough to carry people, also known as flying cars, take off and land.

The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Irene Swil and Symmie Swil, Sydney, Australia
Jennifer Stapleton, Cheltenham, England
Barry McDonald, Burlington, Canada

They gave the correct answers of Arizona, Larry Fink, Simple Minds, crossing the Rubicon, and “Grit”. The theme is Coen Brothers films: “Raising Arizona”, “Barton Fink”, “Blood Simple”, “Miller’s Crossing” and “True Grit”.

You’re never too old for anything.

Betty White
