The world in brief
August 21, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Denmark and the Netherlands pledged to send F-16 fighters to Ukraine, finally granting the embattled country’s wish for Western warplanes. Deliveries of the American-made jet are expected to begin around the end of the year. Denmark said it would send 19 jets; the Dutch government is yet to decide whether to deliver its entire fleet of 42. Ukrainian pilots have already begun training. During a visit to the Netherlands Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, called the decisions “historic”.

Russia’s space agency, Roscosmos, said its Luna-25 probe had “ceased to exist” after colliding with the Moon’s surface. The lander had been scheduled to touch down near the Moon’s south pole on Monday, seeking evidence of frozen water. Roscosmos said it will launch an investigation into the cause of the crash. India’s rival lunar mission, Chandrayaan-3, will attempt a touchdown on Wednesday.

Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said the armed forces would be deployed to help fight wildfires spreading in British Columbia, a western province. Around 30,000 people have been ordered to evacuate, and another 36,000 put on alert. Around 140,000 sq km of land has burned in Canada this fire season, which could stretch into autumn, owing to dry conditions.

Pakistan’s president, Arif Alvi, said that he had refused to sign two bills tightening national-security laws. The bills were said to have gained his assent on Saturday, but the president, an ally of Imran Khan, a recently imprisoned former prime minister, took to social media to repudiate the claim, with “God as my witness”. The Law and Justice Ministry called Mr Alvi’s actions unconstitutional.

Australia will devote $1.7bn to long-range defence systems, its government said, as it continues to bolster its defence capability in the face of a rising threat from China. Most of that will be spent on Tomahawk cruise missiles, making Australia only the third country to stock the munitions, after America and Britain. Australia will also procure anti-radiation and anti-tank missiles.

Global investment in renewable energy reached a record $358bn in the first half of 2023, according to a report by BloombergNEF. Investment in China, particularly in its solar industry, accounted for about half of the total. American investment in solar energy also grew by 75% compared with the same period last year, to $25.5bn, as the Inflation Reduction Act incentivised green-energy projects.

Spain won the women’s World Cup with a 1-0 victory over England in Sydney. The result represents a maiden world championship for La Roja, while denying England’s Lionesses, the reigning European champions, their first such title. The tournament in Australia and New Zealand has been hailed as a landmark success for the women’s game.

Figure of the day: 59, the number of Indian cities that have populations over a million people. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
America and South Korea prepare for war
On Monday America, South Korea and nine other countries kick off a series of military exercises designed to ensure that they are ready if the war of words between the two Koreas breaks out into fighting. Drills will reportedly include exercises that prepare troops for the rapid onset of war and for responding to misinformation. North Korea has also made it clear that it is also prepared for conflict. This month Kim Jong Un, the North’s dictator, has toured munition factories up and down the country, and instructed his top brass to “make full preparations for war”.

On Thursday South Korea’s intelligence agency said that it expected North Korea to launch an intercontinental ballistic missile in response to the drills. But such launches have become almost routine. And America, Japan and South Korea might relish an opportunity to respond together. It would show off the spirit of unity displayed at their first-ever standalone trilateral summit last week.


Biden’s belated visit to Hawaii
On Monday President Joe Biden and his wife, Jill, will travel to Maui, a Hawaiian island recovering from the deadliest American wildfires in over a century. They arrive in the midst of a rescue mission for more than 1,000 people who are still missing, and a febrile debate about where responsibility for the disaster lies.

Some Maui residents have filed lawsuits against a local electricity company, whose broken power cable is suspected to have started the fire. Others are asking why the island’s alarm sirens did not go off. Maui’s chief of emergency management, Herman Andaya, resigned on Thursday, one day after he had defended the decision not to use the sirens.

The White House has also faced tough questions, chiefly about Mr Biden’s decision to go on holiday during the fire and not to visit Hawaii sooner. His trip will be closely watched, as will whether he unlocks more federal aid for stricken residents.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Germany’s inflation dilemma
German inflation is proving sticky. In July the annual inflation rate stood at an uncomfortably high 6.5%, after similar figures in May and June. And the core inflation rate, which excludes volatile energy and food, remained at 5.5%.

But there are signs of slowing, for goods at least. “Producer prices” are those that firms charge for their wares at the factory gate. Germany’s latest producer-price inflation rate, released on Monday, could turn negative for the first time since November 2020. Some producer prices, for instance for construction materials, are largely irrelevant for consumers. Still, the metric provides a hint as to where consumer goods inflation might head.

The news is not all good, though. For Germany’s producer-price rate to turn negative would point to a weakening economy. Such is the dilemma policymakers face as they fight inflation.



PHOTO: ALAMY
Investors experience Zoom fatigue
Zoom, a video-conferencing service, became a household name during the pandemic, when remote working brought in swathes of customers. In a post-pandemic world, however, the firm’s prospects look more downbeat. Zoom faces growing competition from the likes of Microsoft Teams and Google Hangout. A slowing economy is forcing IT departments to tighten their purse strings. In February, with revenue growth slowing, Zoom announced 1,300 layoffs, equivalent to 15% of its workforce. The firm releases its latest earnings on Monday.

One bright spot may be artificial intelligence. In recent years Zoom has taken over two AI startups: Solvvy, a customer-support service, and Kites, a translation platform. Eric Yuan, Zoom’s managing director, has said he wants to inject AI into “almost every feature” that the firm has to offer. But investors seem unconvinced. Since the start of the year Zoom’s share price has fallen by about 2%. By contrast the Nasdaq Composite, a tech-heavy index, has surged by 27%.


PHOTO: SPL
Searching for the origins of magnetars
At a sufficiently large scale the universe approaches uniformity: any star or galaxy has billions more just like it. So even small peculiarities are noteworthy. One such is HD 45166, a so-called binary-star system first observed in 1922. Its primary component is a type of helium-rich star known as a Wolf-Rayet. But scientists noticed something unusual: its peculiar elemental spectra distinguished it from other stars of its type. That prompted researchers to examine it more closely, using telescopes at the European Southern Observatory in Germany and other facilities.

The scientists found that HD 45166’s Wolf-Rayet had the strongest magnetic field ever recorded in a massive star. That led them to predict that, when the star eventually explodes as a supernova, it will leave behind a “magnetar” as a stellar corpse. The origins of magnetars, effectively the universe’s strongest magnets, have long been unclear. Finding more systems like HD 45166 could help change that.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: “Armageddon”, “The Rock” and “Bad Boys” were all films made by which director?

What some folks find funny, other folks find tragic.

Melvin Van Peebles
