The world in brief, July 29th 2023
America offered “unflagging support” for Mohamed Bazoum, the president of Niger, after he was ousted by General Omar Tchiani, the head of his presidential guard. On Wednesday a group of soldiers, including members of the presidential guard, announced a coup on national television; they closed the country’s borders and imposed a nationwide curfew. Various other countries have also denounced the takeover.

The Biden administration agreed to send $345m worth of weapons to Taiwan in an attempt to dissuade the Chinese from aggression. It is the first time Americans will provide munitions directly to the country. China objected vociferously to the decision; a spokesperson for the Chinese embassy in Washington, DC, said that it posed “risks to peace and stability”.

Egypt’s president, Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, said it was “essential” that Russia return to the Black Sea grain deal during the Russia-Africa summit in St Petersburg. On July 17th Russia said it would no longer honour the agreement, signed in 2022, which unblocked an export channel for Ukrainian grain and kept global prices down. Ukrainian officials say that Russia has blocked their efforts to donate grain to Africa.

In a reassuring sign that annual inflation in America is tempering, the Federal Reserve’s preferred measure fell to 3% last month, the Commerce Department said on Friday. The “core” personal-consumption-expenditure index rose by a modest 0.2% from May. A separate index of compensation costs rose by 1% in the second quarter from the previous one, its slowest pace in two years.

Brazil denied an American request to extradite Sergei Cherkasov, an alleged Russian spy. America might hope to swap Mr Chersakov for Evan Gershkovich, a correspondent for the Wall Street Journal jailed in Russia on trumped-up charges of espionage. America indicted Mr Cherkasov in March, accusing him of studying in the country under false identity while gathering intelligence about the war in Ukraine.


Germany’s economy stagnated in the second quarter, under-performing expectations of slight growth. Europe’s largest economy is in bad shape, contracting by 0.1% in the first three months of 2023. While it has now exited its mild recession, helped by recovering household spending, data released earlier this week showed sustained weakness in its manufacturing and services sectors.

A judge in Hong Kong rejected a government request to ban “Glory to Hong Kong”, saying that outlawing the popular pro-democracy anthem could have “chilling effects” on free speech. The territory’s Department of Justice filed a civil injunction against the song in June, after it was mistakenly played in several international sporting events in place of China’s anthem.

Word of the week: peremalyvat, or “to grind through”. The Russian verb is being invoked by forces on both sides of the war in Ukraine. Read the full story.




PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A sinking feeling at Russia’s Navy Day
Russia celebrates its annual Navy Day on Sunday. The festivities commemorate the founding of the navy in 1696, and usually involve a review of the fleet off St Petersburg—with Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, in attendance. But this year’s parade will be muted. Eight Russian vessels have been destroyed in the war on Ukraine, including the flagship, Moskva. And for the first time since 2017 there will be no nuclear-powered submarines—an absence British defence intelligence puts down to maintenance and training demands.

Other factors may dampen the mood further. On July 27th a Russian sailor was arrested on suspicion of plotting to blow up a warship at Ukraine’s behest. There are jitters over possible Ukrainian drone strikes on the parade. And naval tensions between Russia and the West are growing, amid Russia’s abrogation of a grain deal with Ukraine and a renewed blockade of its ports. This year Navy Day may struggle to find its sea legs.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Talks won’t fix Palestinian divisions
On Sunday the leaders of 14 Palestinian factions meet in Cairo for talks. They will try to end the rifts that have stopped them forming a united front against Israel, whose ruling far-right politicians want to expand illegal settlements and annex parts of the West Bank.

To lay some groundwork, on Wednesday Mahmoud Abbas, whose nationalist Fatah party controls the occupied West Bank, had a rare tête-à-tête in Turkey with Ismail Haniyeh, the leader of Hamas, the Islamist militia that rules Gaza. The two have been at odds since Hamas seized the territory in 2007.

That is unlikely to change. The two factions have spent 16 years signing reconciliation deals and then ignoring them: neither wants to make concessions. In 2021 Mr Abbas scheduled long-overdue elections (his presidential term should have ended in 2009) only to cancel them, blaming Israel—which many Palestinians considered a pretext to stop a vote Hamas looked likely to win. Talking about reconciliation is easy; enacting it is not.


PHOTO: AP
Europe’s extreme weather prompts varied responses
Much of southern Europe is struggling to cope with lethal fires and storms. Over 500 wildfires have ravaged Greece this year, most in recent weeks. Italy has faced fires in the south and devastating storms in the north.

But the crisis has prompted very different responses from conservative governments in those countries. On Thursday Greece’s prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, made calls to reform the country’s fire-fighting policies. He talked of unspecified measures to alleviate the impact of global warming. “The climate crisis may be a reality,” he declared. “But it cannot be an excuse.”

By contrast Giorgia Meloni, his Italian counterpart, did not acknowledge global warming in a video message on Wednesday. She promised a “plan of prevention” to forestall floods, landslides and coastal erosion. But a €1.3bn ($1.4bn) project to do just that is already part of Italy’s post-pandemic recovery programme—and her government wants to delay it. Unless she acts with greater urgency, Ms Meloni risks getting burnt in the next disaster.


PHOTO: ALAMY
The problem with AI preachers
Can robots hold religious beliefs? Perhaps not, but they can certainly deliver sermons. A recent paper in the Journal of Experimental Psychology examined three studies on robotic preachers. At the Kodai-Ji Buddhist temple in Kyoto, Japan, a humanoid robot called Mindar has delivered sermons since 2019. But the automation was a mixed blessing: people left smaller donations for Mindar than they did for humans.

A second study, based on a Taoist temple in Singapore, found another flaw. Worshippers who listened to sermons delivered by Pepper, a robot, considered them “less credible” than those given by human priests. The study found that they were also less likely to share its message or distribute flyers to support the temple. And a third study found that American Christians who read a sermon online said they trusted it less after being told that it had been written by artificial intelligence. Human preachers worried about their jobs have good reason to keep the faith.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Weekend profile: Faustin-Archange Touadéra, president of the Central African Republic
Good news is rare in the Central African Republic, one of the world’s poorest and most unstable countries. But the election of Faustin-Archange Touadéra in 2016 offered some hope. Whereas some of his predecessors took office through coups—much like the one that unfolded in Niger on Wednesday—this mild-mannered mathematician won at the ballot box. Yet his reliance on Wagner mercenaries to prop up his regime has dented optimism. On Sunday the CAR will hold a referendum that could enable him to rule for life.

Mr Touadéra was born in 1957 in French Equatorial Africa, three years before it won independence as the CAR. During his childhood Jean-Bédel Bokassa, a megalomaniac dictator, ran the country, one of the world’s poorest and most unstable. Mr Touadéra was a university administrator when, in 2008, he was made prime minister by the CAR’s president, François Bozizé (who had seized power in a coup). In 2013 Mr Bozizé was himself toppled in a putsch. After his successor was forced out, UN peacekeepers arrived. In 2016 Mr Touadéra won the presidency with genuine and widespread support. His election seemed to promise a more democratic future.

But the CAR’s relations with the West and its African neighbours soon soured. In 2018 Mr Touadéra signed an agreement with Russia to train CAR troops. The trainers came from Wagner, the private army run by Yevgeny Prigozhin. Wagner is now heavily involved in the CAR’s army, politics and economy. Mr Touadéra’s regime has handed its leaders ​​diamond mines in exchange for security. A report by The Sentry, an American investigative outfit, accused Mr Touadéra’s army and Wagner of widespread rape, torture and murder.

Since a second, less convincing election win in 2021 Mr Touadéra has concentrated power within his minority ethnic group, the Mbaka-Mandja. Sunday’s referendum could abolish term limits, allowing him to run again in 2025. Some Wagner troops left the CAR after Mr Prigozhin’s aborted mutiny in June, but others have arrived to oversee the vote.

Russia wants Mr Touadéra in power in order to maintain its waning influence in Africa. Danièle Darlan, a constitutional judge in the CAR, told reporters that Russian diplomats had pressured her to change the constitution. She said no. In October 2022, after the court refused to be cowed, Ms Darlan was removed from her job—by presidential decree.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Smoking a fag and leering, he tormented a bank (5,6)

1 across Confusion in avid maker of chips? (6)

2 across Look inside coat for meal (5)

3 across The MP I rejected hid a multinational enterprise (6)

Factual clues

1 down His default reputation alleged to be of a “disingenuous grifter” (5,6)

1 across Its chips power most of the world’s biggest AI models (6)

2 across You need it to make a pizza from scratch (5)

3 across Mark Zuckerberg runs a bloated social-media one (6)



The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Adrian Shakeshaft, Hereford, Britain
Jyrki Raina, Kannuskoski, Finland
Youssef Fadel, Cairo, Egypt

They all gave the correct answers of Anne Rice, The Wall, George Sand, The Fly and The Bad News Bears. The theme is paper: rice paper, wallpaper, sandpaper, flypaper and newspaper

The questions were:
Monday: Which author produced the gothic series of novels called “The Vampire Chronicles”?
Tuesday: Which 1979 Pink Floyd album is about a rock star suffering from alienation?
Wednesday: Which French novelist had an affair with Frederic Chopin and was the subject of two poems by Elizabeth Barrett Browning?
Thursday: Which Vincent Price horror movie was remade in 1986 by David Cronenberg with Jeff Goldblum in the lead?
Friday: Which 1976 film featured Walter Matthau as the coach of a youth baseball team?

You may choose to look the other way but you can never say again that you did not know.

William Wilberforce
