The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (03:35 GMT+1 / 10:35 Hong Kong)

Ukraine’s military chief, Valery Zaluzhny, announced his forces had retaken more than 3,000 square kilometres of Ukrainian territory in 11 days—vastly more than Russia had captured in several months of grinding combat since April. The recapture of two logistical hubs, Izyum and Kupyansk, has in effect ended Russia’s grand plans to seize control of the entire Donbas, Ukraine’s eastern region.

In a speech after a ceremony to commemorate the 21st anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, in which ​​19 terrorists from al-Qaeda killed nearly 3,000 people on American soil, President Joe Biden vowed to “never give up” in the face of terrorist threats. He also called for Americans to remember how they “came together” in the days following the carnage.

Sweden’s general election remained too close to call on Monday morning, though the country’s right-wing opposition bloc appeared to have taken a very slim lead, reversing the trend indicated by exit polls. Even with 90% of the vote counted, a result is not expected before Wednesday. Crime and immigration have pushed some voters rightwards, but concerns over Europe’s energy crisis could help the ruling centre-left coalition.

The coffin containing Queen Elizabeth II travelled by road from Balmoral Castle, in the Scottish Highlands, where she died on Thursday, to Edinburgh. It will be flown to London on Tuesday. The queen will lie in state for four days at Westminster Hall. The state funeral for Britain’s oldest and longest-reigning monarch will take place on September 19th, at Westminster Abbey. King Charles III was proclaimed as head of state of both Australia and New Zealand.

America promised Sri Lanka $60m in aid to be split between fertiliser imports and humanitarian assistance. This year the country was hit by an economic crisis, which caused shortages of food, fuel and medicines, and a constitutional crisis which culminated in the ousting of its then president, Gotabaya Rajapaksa, in July. The new president, Ranil Wickremesinghe, has promised sweeping reforms.

Canada’s Conservative Party picked Pierre Poilievre, a veteran parliamentarian, to lead them into the next election, due in 2025. To his supporters the populist Mr Poilievre is the plain-speaking, hard-edged, antithesis of many Canadian politicians, including the Liberal Party prime minister, Justin Trudeau. Mr Poilievre said that a government under him could cost less and deliver more.

The prime minister of Greece, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, called comments by Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, “unacceptable”. Mr Erdogan had suggested possible military action over disputed territory in the Aegean Sea. Tensions have been rising in recent days between the neighbours, which are historic rivals but also NATO allies.

Fact of the day: 350, the weight in kilograms of a HARM missile being used by Ukraine against Russia in its current counter-offensive. Read the full story.

Our model of the contest for Congress

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On November 8th America holds elections for one-third of the Senate and all 435 members in the House. To predict the outcome, each day The Economist’s election model runs 10,000 simulated elections based on polling, demographics, fundraising and historical results. It currently gives the Democrats a 77% chance of holding the Senate, and the Republicans a 74% chance of taking the House.

A few months ago the Democrats seemed poised to lose both. But the unpopular reversal of Roe v Wade, and the Republicans’ selection of unimpressive Senate candidates, have damaged the Republicans’ chances. The Democrats, meanwhile, passed some legislation and may be getting a boost as inflation slows.

Our predictions may change. The Republicans have time to catch up. And in the 2020 election pollsters overestimated Democratic votes. But another factor may help the Democrats: fundraising. In nearly every tight Senate race, the Democratic candidates have received more donations than their opponents.


Imran Khan in court

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Since he was ousted from office in April Imran Khan has become a fierce critic of Pakistan’s government. The former prime minister has staged giant rallies, clamoured for fresh elections and served up intemperate speeches. That outspokenness has irritated those now in office, and brought him a barrage of criminal charges. On Monday final arguments in a critical court case will resume.

The former cricket star, who leads the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party, faces both contempt and terrorism charges related to a speech he made on August 20th in which he blamed police and a judge for the torture of one of his aides.

Despite catastrophic floods, which have cost more than 1,000 lives and $30bn in losses, many in Pakistan remain engrossed by this political drama. If Mr Khan were convicted on any of the charges, he would be disqualified from standing for office for five years. A technicality may take him down, but his wide support on the streets will not be diminished.

Famine at the door in Somalia

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Somalia is in the midst of a humanitarian crisis. The search for food has driven 1m Somalis from their homes and some children are dying. A technical definition of a famine is where at least 20% of households face an extreme lack of food, 30% of children are suffering from acute malnutrition, and two people for every 10,000 dying each day because of starvation or malnutrition and disease. An independent panel, composed of UN experts, members of NGOs and academics, last week decided that this threshold had not yet been met. But the situation is still dire.

Last week the UN’s humanitarian chief said that to avert a famine $1bn in new donations would be needed, on top of $1.5bn it had previously called for. Much of that first appeal has been raised. In July America committed $476m. But with an Islamist insurgency complicating relief efforts and rains next month expected yet again to fail, the help, however generous, may not come soon enough.

Joe Biden’s war on cancer

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
It is 60 years since President John F. Kennedy gave a speech outlining America’s intention to land a man on the moon. Marking the anniversary, on Monday, President Joe Biden will set out his wish for renewed efforts on a similarly challenging endeavour—fighting cancer.

He first launched the Cancer Moonshot Initiative in 2016, as vice-president, a year after one of his sons, Beau, died of brain cancer. The scheme pledged $1.8bn in public funding over seven years to support a variety of efforts, such as improving therapeutics, detection and patient-driven care. Public funds continued to flow during Donald Trump’s administration.

In February the president relaunched the initiative, setting a goal of cutting the death rate from cancer in half by 2047. Better screening of potential patients is particularly pressing after an estimated 9.4m tests were missed in 2020 because of the pandemic. The fight against cancer is a rare bipartisan issue, though the public funds committed to this moonshot effort—while large—remain far short of those spent on getting to the actual moon.

America’s television gongs

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Emmy Awards have become a battleground in the streaming wars. Each year the combatants—notably Amazon, Apple, Disney, HBO, Hulu and Netflix—hope that by winning an armful of golden statuettes, they might also persuade subscribers that their platform hosts the best content. The prizes are to be dished out on Monday.

Last year the contest had a clear winner: Netflix scooped up 44 prizes, followed by HBO with 19. Netflix’s triumph was largely down to “The Crown” and “The Queen’s Gambit”, which together accounted for half of the streaming service’s haul. This year it is “Succession”, HBO’s flagship show, that should do well. The drama has already won ten Emmys since it first aired in 2018; it is up for 25 awards. (Look out for gongs for Best Drama Series and Best Supporting Actor.) Apple’s “Ted Lasso”, meanwhile, may continue to dominate the comedy categories. Executives and investors (and, who knows, perhaps even regular viewers) will be watching closely.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Which series of novels, written by Stephenie Meyer, focused on the tribulations of Bella Swan, a teenager who falls in love with a vampire?

I do not believe in taking the right decision, I take a decision and make it right.

Muhammad Ali Jinnah
