The world in brief
May 1, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

JPMorgan Chase and PNC, two American banks, are among around six said to have been asked by the American government to bid to buy First Republic, a struggling lender. Bids for the bank’s deposits and assets were due by noon in New York and a deal is expected on Sunday evening. Shares in First Republic plunged by 49% in after-hours trading on Friday after reports that it may enter receivership.

Heavy fighting resumed in Khartoum, Sudan’s capital, after the collapse of the latest three-day ceasefire which began on Thursday. Millions of people are stuck in the city, where food and medicine supplies are running low. Across the country more than 500 people have been killed during two weeks of fighting. Thousands of foreign nationals have been evacuated from the country.

Manufacturing activity in China unexpectedly shrank in April, a sign that the country’s economy is undergoing a patchy recovery after the lifting of strict covid restrictions. The official manufacturing purchasing managers’ index was 49.2, down from 51.9 in March. Anything below 50 is considered a contraction in activity. A poll of economists, published by Reuters, had predicted the figure would be 51.4 in April.

Paraguay’s ruling party was leading in the country’s presidential election with half of the votes counted. Polls had suggested a close presidential race between Santiago Peña, of the ruling Colorado Party, and Efraín Alegre, the head of a centre-left coalition. The Colorado Party has ruled Paraguay for most of the past 75 years but is accused of corruption. Mr Alegre has challenged the country’s policy of recognising Taiwan rather than China.

Cuba’s government cancelled the May Day parade traditionally held in Revolution Square on International Workers’ Day, blaming a shortage of the fuel needed to bus hundreds of thousands of attendees to the capital Havana. American sanctions and falling imports from Venezuela have left the island so short of petrol that some drivers queue for days to fill up their cars.

Pope Francis urged a congregation in Budapest not to close their doors to migrants and those fleeing conflict. During a three day visit to Hungary the Catholic leader repeatedly expressed his concerns about the war in Ukraine. The country’s prime minister, Viktor Orban, has been less enthusiastic than other EU leaders in his support for Ukraine. He recently banned the import of Ukrainian grain.

Arm, a British chip designer owned by SoftBank, confirmed that it registered confidentially for a stockmarket listing in New York. The company is reportedly hoping to raise up to $10bn in what would be the largest IPO this year. Initial offerings are down around 22% in America this year amid ongoing uncertainty in markets and the economy.

Fact of the day: $880m, the value of overpayments made by Ukrainians keen to pay more tax than they are required to. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
First Republic’s fate is nearly sealed
Another large American bank is on the brink of failure. On Sunday regulators were scrambling to complete a sale of First Republic Bank, a lender with about $200bn in assets, before markets open in Asia on Monday. A handful of banks, including JPMorgan Chase, were among the potential buyers. The major sticking point is how to divvy up First Republic’s losses, with potential suitors wanting hefty support from the government.

Like other American banks that have collapsed recently, First Republic suffered from deposit outflows and shrinking asset values as interest rates rose. The process of opening up First Republic’s books and hashing out the public backstop has been more orderly than for the American bank failures in March. But its demise has still been stunningly swift, from a market value of $20bn two months ago to a fire sale now, sowing worries that it will not be the last.


PHOTO: AP
Labour Day protests in France
Eight French unions are hoping to use Labour Day for another push against new pension rules. President Emmanuel Macron’s reform to raise the minimum pension age from 62 years to 64 became law in April. But the measure remains deeply unpopular, and union leaders are hoping that a 13th day of strikes and protests on Monday will yet force him to reverse course.

The demonstrations will also be a test for France’s new face of radical trade unionism. In March Sophie Binet, a 41-year-old former student unionist, became the first female leader of the Confédération Générale du Travail, the country’s most militant union, which has links to the Communist Party. Even if the number of protesters disappoints, unions plan to make life difficult for Mr Macron, organising noisy saucepan-banging demonstrations as he tours the country trying to “reconnect” with people.

On April 28th Fitch, a ratings agency, downgraded French sovereign debt, partly on the grounds that social unrest will complicate policymaking. Mr Macron got his reform through, but at the cost of uncertainty about what happens next.


PHOTO: ALAMY
America and the Philippines interweave their China strategies
President Joe Biden and his Philippine counterpart, Ferdinand “Bongbong” Marcos, meet in Washington on Monday to discuss tightening the military alliance between their countries. For separate reasons, each country resents Chinese armed encroachment on parts of the South China Sea where the Philippines has internationally recognised claims.

The encroachment hampers Philippine exploitation of natural resources. And it imperils any American use of the Philippines as a base for the defence of nearby Taiwan, should China invade the self-governing island which it considers a renegade province.

A closer alliance between America and the Philippines could deter China from invading Taiwan. That appeals to Mr Biden. And Mr Marcos will hope that an improved relationship with America will discourage Chinese armed vessels, most civilian but some naval, from encroaching on waters that the Philippines claims. After getting its own way in the South China Sea for a long time, China is being challenged.



PHOTO: ALAMY
Liverpool dresses up for Eurovision
The Beatles never toured Ukraine. But bronze statues of the band in their hometown, dressed up in white vyshyvankas, traditional Ukrainian embroidered shirts, make them look as though they did. Liverpool is preparing to host the Eurovision song contest, which culminates on Saturday May 13th, on behalf of Ukraine, which won last year’s event shortly after Russia invaded.

In the run-up to the contest a two-week artistic festival is being held, starting on Monday. Most of EuroFestival’s art has been made in collaboration between British and Ukrainian artists which the event’s director, Claire McColgan, calls a “mashup” of Scouse and Ukrainian “brilliance”. The line-up includes a post-apocalyptic opera (“Chornobyldorf”) and a Crimean Tatar folk-inspired album by Jamala, the singer who won Eurovision in 2016. On May 5th hundreds of performers will take part in the “Blue and Yellow Submarine Parade” (invoking Ukraine’s flag and a Beatles song), an “outdoor underwater sea disco” complete with a giant glowing jellyfish.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Liverpool dresses up for Eurovision
The Beatles never toured Ukraine. But bronze statues of the band in their hometown, dressed up in white vyshyvankas, traditional Ukrainian embroidered shirts, make them look as though they did. Liverpool is preparing to host the Eurovision song contest, which culminates on Saturday May 13th, on behalf of Ukraine, which won last year’s event shortly after Russia invaded.

In the run-up to the contest a two-week artistic festival is being held, starting on Monday. Most of EuroFestival’s art has been made in collaboration between British and Ukrainian artists which the event’s director, Claire McColgan, calls a “mashup” of Scouse and Ukrainian “brilliance”. The line-up includes a post-apocalyptic opera (“Chornobyldorf”) and a Crimean Tatar folk-inspired album by Jamala, the singer who won Eurovision in 2016. On May 5th hundreds of performers will take part in the “Blue and Yellow Submarine Parade” (invoking Ukraine’s flag and a Beatles song), an “outdoor underwater sea disco” complete with a giant glowing jellyfish.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which children’s television character was assisted by Lofty, Dizzy and Scoop?

Fear has its uses but cowardice has none.

Anne McCaffrey
