The world in brief
June 14, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Donald Trump pleaded not guilty to 37 charges stemming from his alleged mishandling of classified documents. America’s former president was arraigned at a federal courthouse in Miami, and joined in court by Waltine Nauta, his personal aide and co-defendant. Mr Trump was neither handcuffed nor required to take a mugshot. Local police earlier said they were preparing for crowds of up to 50,000 around the courthouse, but only several hundred protesters turned up.

Ukraine claimed to have recaptured seven villages from Russian forces since it began its counter-offensive last week. Hanna Maliar, the deputy defence minister, said 91 sq km (35 sq miles) had been reclaimed in recent days. The Kremlin insisted that it had repelled Ukrainian attacks. On Tuesday morning its forces launched air strikes on Kryvyi Rih, a city in central Ukraine, reportedly killing 11 people.

Headline inflation in America eased to 4% (year-on-year) last month, beating economists’ expectations of 4.1%. It is the lowest inflation rate since March 2021—although still far above the Federal Reserve’s target of 2%. The Fed will make its interest rate decision on Wednesday. Core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, rose 5.3%, in line with predictions.

The American novelist Cormac McCarthy died, aged 89, at his home in Santa Fe, New Mexico. His books, often bleak and violent, were much lauded: he won the Pulitzer Prize for “The Road” in 2007, and the National Book Award for “All the Pretty Horses” in 1992. Those two books became films, as did “No Country for Old Men”, which won four Oscars.

Russia’s government proposed a one-time tax on companies with annual profits of 1bn roubles ($11.9m) since 2021. The levy is expected to raise 300bn roubles and plug a budget deficit that has widened as oil prices have fallen. “I’ll tell you a big secret”, said a Kremlin official, somewhat improbably: “The idea…came from business, not the state”.

Bunge, the world’s biggest oilseed processor, and Viterra, a grain trader, will merge to create a global agribusiness giant in a deal that will probably draw scrutiny from competition regulators. Viterra shareholders will receive $6.2bn worth of Bunge shares and $2bn in cash; Bunge will assume $9.8bn of Viterra’s debt. Shares in Bunge fell 2.5% in premarket trading.

A new song by the Beatles—starring John Lennon, who was assassinated in 1980—will be released this year. Sir Paul McCartney announced that Mr Lennon’s voice had been “extricated” using AI. Controversy over AI music is intensifying: thousands listened to songs purportedly by Drake and The Weeknd in April before it transpired that they were AI-generated without the musicians’ consent.

Figure of the day: 18m, the number of Indian migrants spread around the globe, according to the latest UN estimates from 2020. Read the full story.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Russia’s answer to Davos falls flat
On Wednesday the St Petersburg International Economic Forum, the biggest event of Russia’s economic calendar, kicks off. The talking-shop has previously attracted everyone from the secretary-general of the United Nations to the president of France. The cost of attendance ($25,000) is supposed to reflect the opportunities for schmoozing.

But this year will be different. True, Russia’s finance minister and central-bank governor are expected to attend. President Vladimir Putin will probably stop by. Yet few other dignitaries will participate in the discussions, which will cover weighty subjects such as “technological sovereignty in agribusiness”. Western journalists are not allowed to take part; Western businesspeople do not want to. Indeed it is not clear that any world leaders are planning to make the trip. The event is billed as Russia’s answer to the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum at Davos, a Swiss mountain resort. Instead, it merely highlights the country’s isolation on the global stage.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Lebanon tries to pick a new president, again
After 11 failed attempts, Lebanon’s parliament will try again on Wednesday to elect a president to replace Michel Aoun, whose term ended in October. Previous votes were a farce: many MPs cast blank ballots or failed to show up. Do not expect progress this time. The apparent front-runner is Jihad Azour, a former finance minister, who announced his candidacy on Monday after denying for months that he wanted the job. Christian parties and independent MPs have endorsed Mr Azour, whose economic expertise would be useful. The country has been mired in a financial crisis since 2019.

Still, he faces fierce opposition from Hizbullah, the Shia militia-cum-political-party. It wants Suleiman Frangieh, a veteran politician close to the regime of Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s president, to fill the job. Many Lebanese think the parties supporting Mr Azour are in fact doing so to try and convince Hizbullah to dump Mr Frangieh and back a lesser-known consensus candidate. With little prospect of that, the deadlock looks set to continue.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Germany’s first National Security Strategy
Before taking office in late 2021, Germany’s three-party coalition sought to reassure voters it would govern wisely. Its pledges included drafting a National Security Strategy, a first for the country. Delayed by Russia’s war on Ukraine and internal wrangling, the document will be presented on Wednesday by the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, alongside the foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, and other ministers.

The strategy will probably commit to strengthening Germany’s trans-Atlantic and European alliances. That means reaffirming a commitment to raise defence spending to 2% of GDP—a longstanding promise to NATO that Germany has failed to meet. But talk is cheap: analysts will pore over the wording for firm details. The text may also skirt tough topics, such as how to steer between German economic interests in China and the growing rivalry between the Asian military power and America. Still, it is the ambition underpinning the statement that counts: in a more dangerous world, Germany is recognising the need to step up.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Monitoring the Zaporizhia nuclear plant
A new team of monitors from the International Atomic Energy Agency, a UN nuclear watchdog, could arrive at the Zaporizhia nuclear-power facility in occupied southern Ukraine as early as Wednesday. Fears of a possible nuclear accident are heightened. The plant drew water to cool its reactors from the Kakhovka reservoir, which was destroyed with the bursting of a huge dam in the neighbouring Kherson region.

After the dam explosion, IAEA staff said that there was “no immediate risk” to the facility as it stores enough water for a few months nearby. The new monitoring team will assess these water reserves and the plant’s cooling systems. Yet the dam’s destruction, probably by the Russians, has also introduced an ominous possibility that will hang over the team’s work. It’s now highly unlikely that the plant’s reactors, which have been in “shutdown” modes for months, could be fired up to generate electricity in the foreseeable future. If deemed useless by the Russian occupiers, it is possible that they might sabotage the plant, perhaps before a retreat.



PHOTO: CAPITAL PICTURES
The “Full Monty” back on screens
A quarter of a century after their one-night-only striptease, the six former steelworkers who were the heroes of “The Full Monty” are back. An eight-part drama series of the same name is out on Wednesday on Hulu in America and Disney+ elsewhere. Released in 1997, the original film was a surprise international hit. Its many fans fondly recall the scene in which the men dance to “Hot Stuff” in a dole queue in Sheffield, a city in Yorkshire.

In the television reprise, things are the same but different. The group’s ringleader is once again Gaz (played by Robert Carlyle), a chancer with a heart of gold; his best friend Dave (Mark Addy) is still married to Jean (Lesley Sharp). But do not expect the greybeards to get their kit off again. There are plenty of fully clothed high jinks, but the plot focuses on the friends’ enduring struggles as they navigate the impact of government austerity and the caprices of the welfare state.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Wednesday: Which body held its first sessions at the Royal Exchange in New York city in 1790?

Tuesday: What substance is associated with a 15th wedding anniversary?

Perhaps it is impossible for a person who does no good to do no harm.

Harriet Beecher Stowe
