The world in brief
April 25, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Sudan’s warring military factions agreed to a 72-hour ceasefire brokered by America and Saudi Arabia. Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, announced the truce after two days of negotiations. Previous attempts at a ceasefire have failed. Mr Blinken also said that America would work with Sudanese civilian groups and regional partners to “support a durable end to the fighting”. Clashes between Sudan’s army and the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary unit, have killed more than 400 people so far.

Tucker Carlson, the incendiary primetime host at Fox News, is leaving the conservative cable network. “Tucker Carlson Tonight” averaged more than 3m nightly viewers in 2022. In a statement Fox failed to explain the reason behind Mr Carlson’s departure. Soon after, CNN, another news channel, said it fired host Don Lemon. Mr Lemon was accused earlier this month of mistreating female co-workers (he denied the allegation).

First Republic, an American regional bank, will sack 20-25% of its workforce after first-quarter earnings revealed it lost more than $100bn in deposits. Its total deposits stand at $104.5bn—but that figure includes the $30bn that 11 big lenders parked in it in March, to help shore up America’s teetering banking system. First Republic’s share price fell by 7% in after-hours trading.

Netflix will invest $2.5bn in producing South Korean content over the next four years. The announcement came after Ted Sarandos, the streaming giant’s co-chief executive, met Yoon Suk-yeol, South Korea’s president, in Washington. The proposed investment would double the amount the company has spent in South Korea so far. Over 60% of Netflix viewers watched a show from the country in 2022.

Two explosions at a counter-terrorism police station in north-west Pakistan killed at least a dozen people and injured 50 others, according to police. No group immediately claimed responsibility, but the Tehreek-e Taliban Pakistan have carried out similar attacks this year. The Taliban group operating in Pakistan is separate from—but has been emboldened by—the one ruling Afghanistan.

LVMH became the first European company to surpass $500bn in market value. The luxury-goods giant has benefitted from booming sales in China, as well as the strengthening of the euro against the dollar. Earlier this month LVMH broke into the ranks of the world’s ten biggest companies. Its shares have climbed 32.9% so far this year.

Police in Kenya recovered 73 bodies, including those of children, while investigating Paul Mackenzie Nthenge, a pastor who allegedly told his flock to starve themselves to death so that they might “meet Jesus”. Mr Nthenge was charged last month after two of his young followers were found dead. William Ruto, the country’s president, said that Mr Nthenge’s teachings were akin to terrorism.

Fact of the day: 40%, the proportion of Ukraine’s fighter jets that have been lost since the start of the war. Read the full story.


PHOTO: AP
The flight from Khartoum
After ten days of fierce fighting Khartoum, Sudan’s capital, is becoming a ghost town. Many foreign diplomats have been evacuated and ordinary Sudanese are fleeing to safety in the countryside or in neighbouring countries like Egypt. Many escapees are coming under fire from bullets and mortars. Across the country hundreds of civilians have been killed.

The city is the centre of a battle between the two most powerful figures in Sudan’s military government. General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, the country’s de facto leader since a coup in 2019, leads the army. Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo, a warlord, heads the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary unit that grew out of the Janjaweed militias accused of genocidal acts in Darfur in the mid-2000s.

With food, water and medical supplies fast running out, a humanitarian crisis is mounting. Looting is rampant. The two warring groups agreed to a 72-hour ceasefire, brokered by America, that begins on Tuesday at midnight. But previous ceasefires have collapsed within minutes.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Microsoft and Alphabet report
On Tuesday Microsoft and Alphabet, which owns Google, will report their quarterly earnings. The results will illustrate how the tech giants are faring in the economic downturn, as well as the progress of the new wave of artificial intelligence.

Microsoft and Alphabet are the second- and third-biggest cloud computing providers, behind Amazon. As economic turmoil has dragged down IT spending, revenue growth has slowed in their cloud units. Online advertising, which accounts for four-fifths of Alphabet’s revenue, has been squeezed, too.

Investors will be hoping for better news from the AI boom. Both firms are planning to introduce AI into software such as Google Docs and Microsoft Word. Microsoft has already added an AI-powered chatbot to Bing, its search engine. These new features may attract more customers and advertisers. But developing AI has cost big tech huge amounts of money. Investors will hope that it will say exactly how much.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Jury selection in Carroll v Trump
Three weeks after he was charged in a Manhattan court with crimes involving hush-money payments to Stormy Daniels, an adult-film actress, Donald Trump faces a civil trial in New York stemming from a different alleged episode of sexual impropriety.

E. Jean Carroll, a writer, says that Mr Trump raped her in a dressing room in a department store in the mid-1990s. She is suing the former president for responding to her charge by defaming her as a “liar” and “mentally sick” and by claiming that she said “rape was sexy”. Ms Carroll is also accusing Mr Trump of battery under New York’s Adult Survivors Act, a new law that extends the statutes of limitations for sexual assault.

The judge recently rejected Mr Trump’s bid to delay the trial. On Tuesday the lawyers will begin the search for jurors. Due to concerns about threats they might face, the court will hide their identities.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Spotify grapples with AI music
The world’s biggest music streamer will report its quarterly earnings on Tuesday. Spotify’s audience recently passed half a billion. Content on the platform is growing faster still. The platform holds 100m tracks, of which 20m were added last year. The only snag: many are not made by humans.

Music generated by artificial intelligence presents music platforms with two problems. One is copyright. Spotify has already had to remove tracks that used artificially generated imitations of Rihanna and Drake without their permission. Record labels have also demanded that streamers prevent their music from being used to train AI models.

The other problem is money. The value of royalties paid out by the streamer is growing. But labels’ share of streams fell from 85% in 2018 to 75% in 2022, as users uploaded home-made music to the platform. An explosion of AI-generated tunes threatens to take an even bigger slice and is creating pressure from labels to change the way royalties are allocated.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Private companies landing on the Moon
On Tuesday iSpace, a Japanese company, will attempt to land a small spacecraft in Atlas, a crater in the north-eastern part of the Moon’s Earth-facing hemisphere. All previous lunar landings were carried out by governments, so the attempt marks a new way of achieving them.

iSpace’s HAKUTO-R lander, which has been in orbit around the Moon for a month, should reach the surface at 16:40 GMT. It will then offload two rovers. The functional Rashid was developed by the United Arab Emirates, which is sponsoring the mission, and will undertake experiments for one lunar day (14 Earth days). The second, SORA-Q, was developed by Tomy, a Japanese toy company—and is very cute.

The Russian and Indian governments plan robotic lunar landings later this year. But the trend of governments paying private companies to land lunar payloads on their behalf will continue. Missions by two American companies, Astrobotic and Intuitive Machines, are due in the next few months. The Moon has become a mixed economy.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which novel by L. M. Montgomery, her most popular, is widely acknowledged as a children’s classic?

Monday: For which Woody Allen film did Cate Blanchett win the Best Actress Oscar?

We cannot make good news out of bad practice.

Edward R. Murrow