The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 26, 2023

The Biden administration said it will send 31 Abrams tanks to Ukraine, following Germany’s decision to dispatch 14 of its Leopard tanks. President Joe Biden announced a $400m package that will also include eight M88 recovery vehicles, which can tow the Abrams. Germany’s move—taken after much dithering—allows Poland and other countries to export their German-made Leopards.

Meta said it would soon restore Donald Trump’s Facebook and Instagram accounts, two years after suspending him from the social-media platforms for stoking the Capitol riot on January 6th 2021. His risk to public safety has “sufficiently receded”, said the firm. Lawyers for America’s former president—who is mounting a third run for office—had lobbied for his reinstatement: Facebook has previously been a valuable fundraising tool.

A court in Moscow upheld an order from Russia’s justice ministry to dissolve the Moscow Helsinki Group in the government’s continued crackdown on civil society. Judges said that the humanitarian group had violated legal requirements by operating outside its geographical remit. Originally set up to monitor Soviet abuses in 1976, it is Russia’s oldest human-rights organisation.

Tesla reported a quarterly net income of $3.7bn, up by 59% year over year. Revenues rose by 37% from the same period a year ago, to $24.3bn. The electric-car company recorded a gross margin of 25.9%—down from the past few quarters but still the envy of the auto industry. That will help it absorb recently announced price cuts.

The Bank of Canada signalled that it would become the first major central bank to stop hiking interest rates. After inflation slowed from 8.1% in June to 6.3% in December, it raised interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point, to 4.5%, their highest level since 2008. The bank’s governor said it would implement a “conditional pause” on further hikes.

Shares in Adani Group, a multinational conglomerate that underpins swathes of India’s economy, were hit by a scathing report by Hindenburg Research, an investment firm. The group was accused of market manipulation and accounting fraud; its chief financial officer called the claims “baseless”. Shares in the flagship Adani Enterprises dropped by 3.7% at their lowest point on Wednesday.

ASML, a Dutch manufacturer of chipmaking equipment, beat expectations with fourth-quarter earnings of €1.8bn ($2bn) and predicted sales growth of more than 25% this year. Europe’s largest technology company has been subject to curbs on exports to China, but demand elsewhere in the world is making up for it—ASML had a record backlog of €40bn in orders by the end of 2022.

Fact of the day: 12%, the proportion of Afghan women who said females are treated “with respect and dignity” in their country. Read the full story.

America’s economy stays strong (for now)

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
The American economy seems to have ended 2022 on a high note. Figures published on Thursday are expected to show that GDP in the final three months of the year expanded at an annualised rate of about 2.5%. That would mark America’s second straight quarter of robust growth, defying predictions of a recession—at least for now. A rebound in consumption and resilient non-housing investment were probably the main drivers of the performance.

Yet this could prove to be America’s last strong GDP reading for a while. The Federal Reserve’s aggressive tightening is beginning to make its impact felt. The housing market has gone cold, which will depress investment levels in the coming months. Higher interest rates are also crimping consumers’ ability to borrow, which in turn is weighing on retail sales. GDP data is, by its nature, backward-looking. Forward-looking indicators are much less rosy.

What ubiquitous guns mean for America

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Thursday, President Joe Biden will host a reception at the White House for the lunar new year. The festivities may be more sombre than usual. On Saturday a gunman killed 11 people in a dance hall during new year celebrations in Monterey Park, a largely Chinese-American suburb of Los Angeles. Two days later another man murdered seven people—many of them immigrants—in Half Moon Bay, a city south of San Francisco.

California has stricter gun laws than other states: assault weapons are banned, background checks are required to purchase guns, and officials can confiscate them from people deemed dangerous. Such measures help—gun deaths in California are 37% below the national average—but cannot prevent all attacks in a country where firearms are ubiquitous. State officials are pushing for more restrictions, and Mr Biden has renewed calls for a national assault-weapons ban. But lawmakers will have one eye trained on the Supreme Court, which has recently interpreted the right to bear arms expansively.


A controversial holiday in Australia

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Aussies traditionally celebrate Australia Day, January 26th, with beers and barbecues. In recent years, however, thousands have protested against it. The holiday divides Australians because it marks the landing of the first British settlers in 1788. For Aboriginals—who make up 4% of Australia’s population—Australia Day marks the start of the murder and dispossession of their ancestors. Some call it “Invasion Day” and want to change the holiday’s date.

That now seems possible, even if it is some way off. The Labor government, led by Anthony Albanese, wants to change the constitution to give Aboriginals a bigger say in policy-making. Mr Albanese has already scrapped rules that mandate the holding of citizenship ceremonies on January 26th and is allowing civil servants to take another day off. Some big companies are doing the same. Conservatives bristle, but polls show that almost half of young Australians support changing the date. Sooner or later, Aussies will surely have their patriotic barbecues on a different day.

No war bounty for America’s armsmakers

PHOTO: NORTHROP GRUMMAN
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has boosted military budgets across the West: America authorised a record annual defence budget of $858bn in December. Strategic fears about China are contributing, too. Yet the American defence industry is not reporting bumper results. Lockheed Martin, the world’s largest defence company, beat market expectations this week for fourth-quarter revenues, but yearly sales were lower than in 2021. On Thursday Northrop Grumman, another big producer, expects its quarterly earnings per share to increase by 10% year on year and bounce back from three consecutive quarters of shrinking profits.

But armsmakers are struggling to fully capitalise on the bellicose mood. The tight labour market has made it difficult to recruit staff. Brittle supply chains and rising prices have limited crucial weapons components, particularly the semiconductors needed for precision anti-tank missiles. At least manufacturers need not fear America’s new Congress: even the Republicans pushing to curtail the government’s budget very rarely speak of cuts to defence spending.

Bollywood’s biggest star returns

PHOTO: YASH RAJ FILMS
The release of any film starring Shah Rukh Khan is a big event in India. To his fans, he is known as the King of Bollywood. But the build-up to “Pathaan”, which released this week, has been particularly feverish. The action thriller marks Mr Khan’s return to the big screen after a four-year hiatus (following several flops). It also comes as the Hindi-film industry desperately seeks a box-office hit to draw back audiences who have drifted to streaming platforms and South Indian films.

But Mr Khan also has his detractors. Many Hindu nationalists resent the Muslim actor’s enduring popularity. Some want his new film banned over a musical number “Besharam Rang” (shameless colour), in which Mr Khan’s co-star dances briefly in a skimpy saffron bikini (the colour is closely associated with Hinduism). But the hand wringing may have helped the film. The song has been viewed 236m times online, and early ticket sales suggest unprecedented public demand.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which Zodiac sign covers those people born between April 20th and May 20th?

Wednesday: Which kids TV show featured International Rescue, an organisation run by the Tracy family?

What fetters the mind and benumbs the spirit is ever the dogged acceptance of absolutes.

Edward Sapir
