The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 4 hours ago (23:37 GMT+1 / 06:37 Hong Kong)

King Charles III delivered his first address as monarch. He honoured the life and service of Queen Elizabeth II and pledged to follow his mother’s example throughout his reign. He praised Britain’s values and achievements, said he would step back from some of his charitable duties and expressed appreciation for his wife and family. The Accession Council, a group of senior officials and politicians that convenes following the death of a monarch, will formally proclaim him king on Saturday.

Britons entered their first day of national mourning following the death of Elizabeth II, while tributes poured in from foreign leaders. The queen died on Thursday, aged 96, at Balmoral Castle in Scotland. Britain’s oldest and longest-reigning monarch acceded to the throne in 1952 and led Britain, and the Commonwealth, through a period of intense change. Prince Philip, her husband of 73 years, died in April 2021. Her funeral is likely to take place on September 19th.

Volodymyr Zelensky, the president of Ukraine, celebrated the counter-offensive launched by his country’s armed forces, saying that 1,000 square kilometres of Ukrainian territory and “dozens of settlements” had been reclaimed from Russian forces since September 1st. A Russian-appointed official admitted on state television that Ukrainians had achieved a “substantial victory” in breaching Russian defences. Russia retaliated by launching its own attacks on Ukrainian territory, according to Andriy Yermak, Ukraine’s presidential chief of staff.

The World Bank put the cost of rebuilding Ukraine at $349bn—more than one and a half times the country’s GDP last year. In the short term, the bank said, $105bn would be required to prepare for the coming winter and planting season and to repair transport systems, among other necessities. The number of Ukrainians in poverty, or those living on less than $5.50 a day, is projected to rise tenfold, to about a fifth of the population.

Mexico’s senate voted to put the civilian-led national guard under the control of the defence ministry. President Andrés Manuel López Obrador had agitated for the controversial change, which human-rights advocates say will reduce transparency and militarise law enforcement. The UN criticised the proposal, saying that police “should be subordinate to civilian authorities”.

India and China will withdraw troops from a disputed border area in the Himalayas, according to India’s foreign ministry. The withdrawal, which began on Thursday after more than two years of a standoff, will be completed by September 12th. The poorly-defined 3,500km border between the nuclear-armed neighbours has been the site of numerous, and sometimes deadly, territorial skirmishes.

The euro rose back above parity with the dollar, following the European Central Bank’s decision to sharply increase rates to temper euro-zone inflation. The dollar, which has served as a safe harbour for investors fleeing the euro and pound, fell in value by 0.95% against a basket of major currencies.

Word of the week: kunguk, the Iñupiat word for the brightness on the horizon that suggests the presence of sea ice. Read the full story.

What to expect from Charles III

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
King Charles III has had decades to prepare for accession to the British throne, which will be formally proclaimed by the so-called Accession Council on Saturday morning. Yet despite that run-up, no one really knows what his reign will mean for the royal family, or for Britain. For kings, like stocks, past success is no guide to future performance. The queen’s reign epitomised stability: everything about her, from her low-heeled loafers to her restrained emotions, showed a striking consistency.

In some ways Charles will be a continuation of this. His emotions, however, are more mercurial and, for the monarchy, often far too close to the surface. He has complained in particular about his childhood, earning him the moniker “Prince of Wails”. Charles may also make more political noise than did his scrupulously neutral mother. He is already notorious for pushing his many opinions, on everything from modern architecture to industrial farming. But as king, he must know that his success will be judged by the yardstick of hospital visits and school openings. In this, he is likely to excel. Previous heirs to the British throne were wayward or drunken; close aides say Charles works “like a Trojan”.

Ukraine punches back

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The war took a dramatic turn this week when Ukraine launched a fresh assault in the east of the country, on top of its week-old offensive in the southern province of Kherson. On Tuesday Ukrainian tanks and troops sliced through a weak spot in Russian lines east of the city of Kharkiv. In the following days they encircled the town of Balakliya and moved 50km east—marking one of the most rapid advances seen since Russia invaded in February.

Fighting has now reached Kupyansk, a key rail junction that supplies Russian forces in Izyum to the south. Ukraine’s ambition may be to trap defenders in a pocket: as many as 10,000 Russian troops may be caught between the Ukrainian advance and the Oskil river to their rear. Russian military bloggers tracking the war describe panic and confusion. On Thursday Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said that his armies had liberated 1,000 square kilometres in the north-eastern Kharkiv province as well as the southern Kherson province, where progress has been slower.


Canada’s Conservatives to pick a polite populist

PHOTO: ALAMY
On Saturday it is the turn of Canada’s Conservative Party to choose a new leader. The favourite is Pierre Poilievre, a boyish member of Parliament. His take-no-prisoners, Trumpian style helped the party quadruple its membership since the end of 2021.

Though his populist combativeness may win him the leadership, it will be a harder sell with Canadians at large. Most feel there is too much nasty partisanship in politics. Yet it is wrong to pigeonhole Mr Poilievre as a hard right-winger. Though he supported the trucker convoy that paralysed Canada’s capital in February, he doesn’t pander to social conservatives. He says that he will not restrict access to abortion and that life should be made easier for immigrants.

His first order of business will be keeping a diffuse caucus intact. Some moderate Conservatives are talking of splintering off to occupy a middle ground that many feel Canada’s Liberals, under Justin Trudeau, the prime minister, has abandoned by allying themselves with the left-leaning New Democrats. A big job awaits.

Can Bollywood escape its funk?

PHOTO: CAPITAL PICTURES
This is a big weekend for Bollywood, India’s Hindi-film industry. On Friday “Brahmastra: Part One—Shiva”, a mythological-adventure flick, was released in 5,000 theatres across the country, amid much hype and some trepidation. Excitement was sparked by a budget of more than $50m, making the film one of the most expensive ever produced in India, and the promise of a potentially lucrative franchise (already dubbed the “astraverse”) to follow.

The nerves come from Bollywood’s recent struggles. According to an industry tracker, of 26 releases this year, 20 have been flops, losing at least half of their investment. Before the pandemic, box-office revenues had been increasing steadily. But lockdowns weaned Indians away from the cinemas and onto streaming services, where they have largely stayed. Bollywood now hopes to lure back viewers with big hits. “Brahmastra” could be just that, as early data suggests bumper ticket sales, potentially the highest in three years.

Weekend profile: Shavkat Mirziyoyev, Uzbek leader with a reformist bent

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
When Shavkat Mirziyoyev became president of Uzbekistan in 2016, his country was a pariah in much of the democratic world. Previously Central Asia’s most populous nation had been ruled by Islam Karimov, a ruthless despot who clung to power through the Soviet Union’s collapse and his country’s independence in 1991. Although Karimov earned some goodwill among Western governments for helping military operations in neighbouring Afghanistan after 2001, that soon evaporated amid persistent allegations of corruption and rights abuses, including boiling dissidents alive and massacring anti-government protesters in the city Andijan in 2005. He even locked up his own daughter, once considered a successor.

In the six years since Mr Mirziyoyev’s ascent, Uzbekistan has undergone a striking transformation. He has eased state controls on industry, media, religion and civil society, and abolished a forced-labour system for picking cotton, a major export. He has also overseen a diplomatic shift, improving ties with neighbours, expanding links with China and repairing relations with the West. Since America’s withdrawal from Afghanistan in 2021, he has taken a lead in engaging the Taliban and in lobbying Western countries to follow suit. He will build on that legacy next week by hosting a summit of the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation, a grouping of regional powers, in the Uzbek city of Samarkand. For China’s president, Xi Jinping, it will be the first foreign foray in two years.

Some question Mr Mirziyoyev’s reformist credentials. He was, after all, Karimov’s prime minister for 13 years and maintains many restrictions on religion, media and civil activism. Election monitors have flagged concerns about his two presidential victories, while acknowledging progress towards fairness. In July Amnesty International called for an investigation into reports that his troops had used “unlawful force” in quelling protests against plans to change the constitutional status of Karakalpakstan, an autonomous region. Eighteen protesters died and Mr Mirziyoyev withdrew the proposal. Yet even critics acknowledge that he has revitalised the economy: it now rivals neighbouring Kazakhstan’s as the region’s most dynamic. Mr Mirziyoyev is no model liberal. But in a region long stifled by Soviet-era strongmen, he is still a breath of fresh air.

Weekly crossword

Our crossword is designed for experienced cruciverbalists and newcomers alike. Both sets of clues give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Cryptic clues

1 down Arab princes order seafood and hummus—but no meat or mezze—to start (5,4,2)

1 across British prime minister adopts a little liberalism in constitution (6)

2 across Regular zombies seem to be on the larger side? (5)

3 across Overall, odds partially reflect a strong currency (6)

Factual clues

1 down Dynasty from the parched hinterland (5,2,4)

1 across Something that can be divined from sewage (6)

2 across Two-fifths of American adults are this (5)

3 across The “cleanest shirt in the laundry basket” (6)

Email all four answers by 9am BST on Monday to crossword@economist.com, along with your home city and country. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent in Friday's edition.


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Ryan Chua, Singapore

North America: Ariel Brio, San Jose, USA

Central and South America: Alejandro Jara, Santiago, Chile

Europe: Nina Lara Bajec, Maribor, Slovenia

Africa: Tanera Bouchet, Masvingo, Zimbabwe

Oceania: Grant Rees, Queenstown, New Zealand

They all gave the correct answers of hand, martingale, stirrup, bit and Mustang. The theme is horses, which are measured in hands; martingales, stirrups and bits are all pieces of equipment; and a mustang is a feral horse.

The dogmatist within is always worse than the enemy without.

Stephen Jay Gould