The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 1 hour ago (05:21 GMT+1 London)

Boris Johnson, Britain’s prime minister, survived a vote of no-confidence, but was left badly wounded by the act of insurrection within his party. The vote was triggered when at least 54 of his fellow Conservative MPs submitted secret letters of no-confidence. The final tally, 211 to 148, fell short of the simple majority needed to remove him as leader. Mr Johnson said his “decisive” victory drew a line under the matter. But with 41% of his own MPs in rebellion, his government could be set for paralysis.

Fierce street fighting was reported in Severodonetsk, the eastern Ukrainian town that has become the key battleground in Russia’s invasion. Despite being outnumbered and outgunned there, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, said “our heroes do not give up positions”. Meanwhile there were unconfirmed reports of a cholera outbreak in Mariupol, the port city that Russian troops razed before occupying.

Elon Musk, the founder of Tesla, threatened to pull out of his $44bn offer to buy Twitter. Mr Musk accused the social-media platform of failing to provide data on how many of its accounts are fake. Twitter has previously said that less than 5% of its daily active users are spam accounts, but Mr Musk reckons it could be as high as 20%.

Two of the Gupta brothers—a clan of businessmen accused of plundering state institutions in South Africa—were arrested in Dubai. South African officials said extradition talks with the United Arab Emirates were under way. They had fled after a judicial commission began an investigation in 2018. They are believed to have benefited hugely from their ties to Jacob Zuma, a disgraced former president.

Russia’s ambassador to the United Nations stormed out of a Security Council meeting after the EU accused his country of causing a global food crisis. Charles Michel, the European Council president, said the Kremlin was using food supplies as a “stealth missile against developing countries”. Vassily Nebenzia, the Russian envoy, left the meeting as Mr Michel spoke, accusing him of spreading lies.

The trials of 27 pro-democracy figures in Hong Kong, who are accused of conspiracy to commit subversion, were moved to the High Court. This means the defendants could face sentences of life in prison, according to Hong Kong Free Press, a local outlet. The defendants include Joshua Wong, an activist, and Benny Tai, a former law professor. Their alleged crime was to help organise an unofficial primary ahead of legislative elections in 2020.

The yen fell to a 20-year low of nearly 133 against the dollar on Tuesday. The sell-off was fueled by rising interest rates in America—in contrast to Japan’s, which look set to stay close to zero while inflation remains stubbornly low. Investors also worry that high fuel prices will increase Japan’s trade deficit. With monetary options limited, the yen’s fall may not have reached the bottom.

Fact of the day: 40%, the share of prosecutors in San Francisco’s district attorney’s office who quit or were sacked in the 22 months after Chesa Boudin took office. Read the full story.

Australia grapples with inflation

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
In May, just before Australia’s federal election, the Reserve Bank increased interest rates for the first time in over a decade. On Tuesday, confronted with rising inflation, it will do so again. Prices in Australia have not shot up as fast as in Europe or America, but the annual inflation rate of 5.1% in the first quarter of 2022 was still the highest in two decades. Jim Chalmers, the new treasurer, has said that the figure has risen “significantly higher” since then.

Analysts reckon the bank could lift rates to 0.75%. That will sting many Australians, whose fondness for borrowing to buy cars and houses has left them with some of the world’s highest levels of private debt. And on top of higher debt-service costs, rising energy prices could push up power bills by as much as 20% this year. Nor will the pain end there: the Reserve Bank has warned of yet more tightening ahead. The head of the central bank has warned that rates could reach 2.5% before inflation is brought under control.


Boris Johnson scrapes through

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Boris Johnson, Britain's prime minister, wakes up on Tuesday facing the biggest crisis of his chequered political career. On Monday evening 148 Conservative MPs, or 41% of the parliamentary party, voted to eject him from the party leadership, and thus from Number 10. Although Mr Johnson's foes failed to muster the majority they needed to ditch him, they came closer than all but the most optimistic among them had expected.

Among the ranks of the rebels were MPs from all wings of the Conservative Party. Close to three-quarters of backbench Tories—ie, those not obliged by government position to support the prime minister—appear to have renounced their leader. The Partygate scandal has sunk Mr Johnson’s approval ratings to a level that many Tory MPs fear makes him an electoral liability. He emerges from his confidence vote grievously wounded. The prime minister’s enemies, inside and outside his party, scent blood.

The Golden State votes

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Californians head to the polls on Tuesday. In a series of primaries, voters will pick candidates for the state’s local, statewide and congressional elections in November.

The two most interesting races are local. In San Francisco, voters may choose to recall Chesa Boudin, the city’s district attorney. Mr Boudin has become a symbol of America’s “progressive prosecutor” movement, which aims to end mass incarceration and enact other criminal-justice reforms. Los Angeles, meanwhile, will select its candidates for the mayoral race. The pair most likely to advance are Karen Bass, a progressive Democratic congresswoman, and Rick Caruso, a billionaire former Republican who wants to crack down on crime and homelessness.

Democrats and Republicans across America will also pay close attention to California’s congressional primaries, in which the top two finishers advance to the mid-terms regardless of party affiliation. A slew of retirements and redistricting has left eight competitive seats across the state, an unusually high number. Come November, California may be the biggest prize of all.

The Balkans eye EU membership

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Leaders from several western Balkan states that hope to join the European Union will meet on Tuesday in North Macedonia for a summit of the Open Balkan initiative. Launched in 2019 out of frustration at the glacial pace of the EU accession process, the initiative aims to ease intra-Balkan trade and encourage movement of labour.

But the leaders will have something more pressing to discuss at their summit. They fear being left in the slow lane if recent EU-candidacy bids from Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia are fast-tracked. North Macedonia, for instance, submitted a request for membership almost 20 years ago. Still, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine opens a window of opportunity for the Balkans, too. Vladimir Putin’s war has awoken the EU to the geopolitical contests playing out in Europe. There is a Balkan-sized hole in the centre of the EU. If the EU does not fill it, others will.

A cricketing break for Sri Lanka

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As the economic crisis darkens Sri Lankan lives with regular blackouts, one part of the country will be glowing for a few hours on Tuesday night. The cricket stadium in Colombo, the capital, will be bathed in floodlights for a Twenty20 match, the first in a series between Australia and Sri Lanka over the next month. Tickets sold out within five hours.

The games will bring joy, and much-needed economic balm, to a country that in recent weeks has endured protests, rocketing food and fuel prices and a change in prime minister. Sri Lanka’s cricket board plans to donate all the proceeds from ticket sales to public welfare initiatives, such as hospitals. The games could also indirectly help resurrect Sri Lanka’s now-moribund tourism industry. If the Australian tour is successful, Sri Lanka will hope to be able to host the Asia Cup, a more lucrative tournament, in August. That could attract cricket-mad visitors from Bangladesh, India and Pakistan.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which type of tea is named after a British prime minister?

Monday: Which actor, known for playing The Doctor on “Doctor Who”, has recently taken on more villainous roles such as Kilgrave in “Jessica Jones” and Dennis Nilsen, a serial killer?

What is objectionable, what is dangerous about extremists is not that they are extreme, but that they are intolerant.

Robert F. Kennedy
