The world in brief
July 24, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, was fitted with a pacemaker in emergency surgery on Sunday morning. His office said he would leave hospital in time for Monday’s vote on the government’s planned overhaul of the judiciary. Protests against the bill have swelled outside the parliament in Jerusalem. Mr Netanyahu’s proposed reforms would curtail the Supreme Court’s powers to nullify “unreasonable” government decisions. Opponents claim they will facilitate corruption and misgovernment.

Spain’s general election produced an unexpectedly tight result, although the centre-right People’s Party will, as widely predicted, be the biggest party in parliament. Alberto Núñez Feijóo’s PP beat the Socialists, led by Pedro Sánchez, the prime minister, into second place. But even with the support of the hard-right Vox, it will lack a governing majority.

Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, hosted his Belarusian counterpart, Alexander Lukashenko, for the first time since Wagner Group mercenaries rebelled and were reportedly exiled to Belarus. Mr Putin said Ukraine’s counteroffensive “has failed”. Russia still controls more than a sixth of the country. Meanwhile Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, told CNN that Ukraine has reclaimed half of the territory that Russia had seized.

“Barbie” raked in $337m on its opening weekend in cinemas around the world, including $155m in America and Canada, according to Warner Bros—the biggest haul by any film so far this year. The blockbuster was jokingly pitted against “Oppenheimer”, which was also released at the weekend and took $174m in around 80 countries, according to Universal Pictures. Hundreds of thousands of viewers saw both films on the same day.

Thousands of people were evacuated from homes and hotels on Rhodes, a Greek island, as wildfires intensified. Fires are raging across Greece but are most difficult to contain on Rhodes, said the fire service. The country’s heatwave is on track to be its longest ever recorded, a Greek climate expert said. This weekend is expected to be the hottest in July in 50 years.

Russia launched 19 missiles on the Ukrainian port city of Odessa—the largest barrage in a series of strikes since the collapse of a UN-brokered deal enabling grain transit out of the Black Sea hub. UNESCO has expressed alarm at damage to the city’s historic centre, including the Orthodox Transfiguration Cathedral, founded in 1794 and rebuilt in 2003. Rockets also hit museums, port infrastructure and houses, killing two people.

Twitter may rebrand itself. Elon Musk, who bought the social-media platform for $44bn in October, said it would soon “bid adieu to the Twitter brand and, gradually, all the birds”. Mr Musk suggested a preference for the company’s official name, X Corp. And he’s in the market for a logo, which he said could go up worldwide as early as Monday if a “good enough” design is proposed.

Fact of the day: 153,000, the number of books published last year in Britain alone, according to Nielsen BookData. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Israel’s constitutional chaos continues
On Monday Israel’s parliament, the Knesset, is due to vote on an amendment that will severely limit the powers of the Supreme Court. Hundreds of thousands of Israelis have been protesting on the streets against legislation they believe will bring the country to the brink of autocracy. And more worrying for Binyamin Netanyahu, the prime minister—who on Saturday night, at the height of the drama, was taken to hospital to have a pacemaker fitted—are threats by thousands of reserve officers in key military units to end their voluntary service. A general strike looks possible.

Mr Netanyahu will continue manoeuvring between the hardline ministers in his coalition and the opposition, in search of an elusive compromise, until the vote is held. This is not just an argument about the legal minutiae of the “reasonableness standard”, a tool the court uses to hold the government to account, which his coalition wants to abolish. It reflects a much deeper conflict among Israelis over the nature of their country’s democracy.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
The Marcos dynasty’s tricky transformation
Ferdinand “Bongbong” Marcos gives the president’s annual speech to the Philippine congress on Monday, reporting on his first year in office. His rule has so far been competent, if unremarkable. By marking a break from the violence and rapacity of his late father’s regime, it may in the long term improve the dynasty’s public image enough for future generations of Marcoses to be electable as presidents.

But to ensure his own election, the younger Mr Marcos formed an alliance with another political dynasty, founded by his predecessor, Rodrigo Duterte, whose campaign against illegal drugs killed thousands of Filipinos. The alliance obliges Mr Marcos to keep Mr Duterte out of the clutches of international prosecutors, who suspect crimes against humanity. That puts Mr Marcos in a bind: rather than burnish his family’s reputation, he risks tarnishing it further.


PHOTO: REUTERS
America’s busted trustbuster
When Lina Khan became America’s top trustbuster in 2021, expectations were high. Progressives wanted bold moves; companies worried. Instead, her tenure chairing the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) looks flat. On Monday she will speak at the Economic Club of New York and will surely try to put a positive gloss on her accomplishments, such as rules to save consumers from unexpected fees and injunctions against non-compete clauses that block workers from switching jobs.

But the big picture is that Ms Khan has failed in her mission to redefine competition law to cut down tech giants. Courts are getting in the way, blocking her challenges to halt mergers. Last week a federal judge let Microsoft acquire a videogame publisher over FTC objections. Ms Khan believes that corporate consolidation is a threat to innovation, service quality and workers’ wages. Without support from courts, though, that is a theory, not law.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Macron embraces the Indo-Pacific
The French president arrives in the French territory of New Caledonia for a five-day Pacific tour on Monday. Emmanuel Macron wants to assert his country’s Indo-Pacific strategy and offer a French alternative in a region marked by rivalry between China and America.

He visits New Caledonia for the first time since the islands rejected independence in a controversial third and final referendum in 2021. His tour will also take in Papua New Guinea and Vanuatu, where he will become the first French president to visit since Charles de Gaulle in 1966.


Throughout his trip Mr Macron will talk about preserving biodiversity in forests and oceans. But his eye will be on strengthening France’s foothold in the region. The country has around 1.6m citizens in the Indo-Pacific region and 7,000 soldiers at its six naval bases there. Two years after the signing of AUKUS, a security pact between Australia, America and Britain, France wants to show that it too is a strategic force in the Indo-Pacific.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Another week of Hollywood’s blockbuster strike
The second full week of a strike by America’s actors and writers begins on Monday, with the talent apparently no closer to reaching an agreement with the film studios. The video-streaming revolution has pumped tens of billions of dollars into Hollywood in recent years, as old studios and new tech firms compete for subscribers. But creatives complain that the streamers short-change them by offering a smaller share in their shows’ success than was typical in the cable-television era.

With filming at a standstill, the stars seem to have leverage over the suits. But their position is weaker than it looks. The streamers no longer rely on America: Netflix makes some two-thirds of its shows abroad, where production continues. Gaps in the schedule are less obvious now that people watch on demand. And the studios, which were already trying to cut their costs, may even welcome an opportunity to cancel some projects. Expect this one to keep rolling.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which author produced the gothic series of novels called “The Vampire Chronicles”?

Courage is the price that life exacts for granting peace.

Amelia Earhart
