The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (04:00 GMT+1 / 11:00 Hong Kong)

Taiwan scrambled jets to ward off 27 Chinese warplanes that, according to Taiwanese officials, had crossed into the island’s air-defence zone. Chinese fighter jets also breached the median line that divides the Taiwan Strait. The sorties followed Nancy Pelosi’s departure from Taiwan, where she reaffirmed “American solidarity” with the self-governing island that China claims as its own. Ms Pelosi, the speaker of the House of Representatives, is the most senior American politician to visit in 25 years.

American, European and Iranian officials will hold a new round of talks on reviving the 2015 nuclear deal, starting Thursday in Vienna. The agreement, which former president Donald Trump abandoned in 2018, lifted many international sanctions on Iran in exchange for restrictions on its nuclear programme. Negotiations to revive it have been ongoing for more than a year. All parties downplayed expectations of a breakthrough.

Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor, said it could “make sense” to keep the country’s three remaining nuclear power plants open amid concerns over energy supplies from Russia. The plants had been slated for closure by the end of the year. Mr Scholz’s comments came as he visited a turbine for the Nord Stream 1 pipeline. Russia cited problems with the turbine as the cause of reduced gas supplies; the European Union disputes that argument.

Opec and its allies agreed a minuscule increase in oil production of 100,000 barrels a day, just 0.1% of global demand. The cartel’s decision will disappoint America’s president, Joe Biden, and France’s president, Emmanuel Macron. Both leaders have in recent weeks met with the crown prince of Saudi Arabia, Muhammad bin Salman, to persuade the giant petrostate to pump more oil to lower global energy prices.

Eleven professional golfers sued the PGA Tour, alleging the organisation violated American antitrust law when it suspended them from its tournaments after they joined a rival circuit financed by Saudi Arabia. The lawsuit, filed in federal court in California, contends that the PGA sought to “crush nascent competition before it threatens [its] monopoly”. Last month the Department of Justice launched its own probe into the PGA.

Britain’s services sector posted its weakest performance since February 2021, according to the S&P Global/CIPS UK purchasing managers’ index for services. The closely watched index dropped to 52.6 in July, from 54.3 in June, suggesting an easing of growth. This reading was below initial estimates of 53.3. The larger than expected fall comes as the effects of inflation hit consumers and businesses.

Sri Lanka’s president, Ranil Wickremesinghe, said that the country will restart bailout talks with the IMF this month. Mr Wickremesinghe came to power in July following the ousting of his predecessor, Gotabaya Rajapksa. The new president called for a cross-party unity government to be formed to tackle Sri Lanka’s severe economic crisis and suggested that presidential powers should be curtailed.

Fact of the day: 62,000, the number of Cubans estimated to have died as a result of the covid-19 pandemic, a 600% increase over the official toll. Read the full story.

Russia’s faltering invasion

PHOTO: EPA
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine seems to be running out of steam. Richard Moore, the chief of MI6, Britain’s overseas-intelligence service, said as much last week. Russian attacks in Donetsk, in Ukraine’s east, have been half-hearted. A belt of Ukrainian defences shielding the cities of Slovyansk and Kramatorsk is holding firm.

Instead, much of the action is now in the south of the country, where Ukraine is ramping up counter-attacks towards the city of Kherson. Artillery duels are intense and Russia is conducting more air strikes. Ukraine hopes to leverage its advantage in longer-range weapons: on Monday it received four more American HIMARS and three similar European rocket-launchers. Yet pushing Russia out of Kherson province will be hard. Russia is reported to have moved ten of its scarce battalion-sized tactical groups to reinforce the area, virtually doubling its presence. As the war has shown, the defence tends to have the upper hand—whether it is Russian or Ukrainian.


Lufthansa’s unsteady take-off

PHOTO: EPA
Lufthansa will demonstrate an impressive rebound for full-service airlines in Europe when it reports results for the second quarter on Thursday. Travellers are returning to the air with a vengeance after pandemic lockdowns. Preliminary figures suggest a profit before interest and taxes of up to €400m ($405m) compared with a loss in the same period last year of €827m on revenues of €8.5bn. There are bright lights elsewhere, too. IAG, owner of British Airways, recently announced its first quarterly profit since the start of the pandemic, as did Air France-KLM.

Yet amid the surge in demand for summer travel, staff shortages have caused travel chaos and forced airports to ask carriers to cut schedules. Soaring inflation has led to higher wage demands and threats to walk out. Lufthansa’s ground staff have already gone on strike, and this week its pilots overwhelmingly voted for industrial action. Add a looming recession and the resurgence in travel might yet be grounded.

Conservatives flood into Dallas for CPAC

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Thursday thousands of people will head to Dallas, Texas, for the Conservative Political Action Conference. Claiming to be the “most influential gathering of conservatives in the world”, CPAC offers the stage to the American and international right: including Viktor Orban, the populist prime minister of Hungary, who will speak on Thursday.

There are two things to watch. First is the role of Donald Trump. In his speech the former president may offer clues about whether he intends to run again in 2024. Most other speakers at CPAC are Trump loyalists.

Then there are the policies. With Roe v. Wade overturned many conservatives feel the wind is at their back to promote other goals, such as giving parents more rights over curricula. Conservatives may have suffered a setback in Kansas, yet that will only fire up the governors of Texas, Mississippi and Oklahoma, who will address the conference. As will pretty much everyone with dreams of rising on the right.

Britain pulls the monetary lever

PHOTO: DAVID SIMONDS
The time has come for the Bank of England to decide whether to raise interest rates. As its monetary policy committee meets on Thursday, investors expect an increase of 0.5 percentage points, which would be the biggest move in 27 years. An unusually aggressive raise could attempt to tame home-grown inflationary pressure. Although Britain’s annual inflation rate of 9.4% in June was mostly the result of external shocks (principally global energy prices), domestic pressures, such as wage growth, played a role too.

But the policymakers also fear kicking the economy when it is weakening, so could restrict themselves to a 0.25 percentage-point rise. Such a move may also signal hope that domestic inflation could slow on its own. Britain’s labour market is no longer tightening. Retailers are hesitating before passing on cost increases to customers. Energy prices could rise by an eye-popping 70% this autumn, draining wallets and dampening activity. The bank must walk a difficult tightrope.

A homecoming for the Elgin marbles?

PHOTO: ALAMY
Greece and Britain have each laid claims to the Parthenon, or Elgin, marbles for over 200 years. The Greeks say the sculptures were looted from the Parthenon, the ancient temple on the Acropolis in Athens. Britain says Greece’s erstwhile Ottoman overlords approved the removal of the frieze. As other European museums have started returning colonial-era treasures, the British Museum has stood out in its refusal—until now. This week it proposed a “Parthenon partnership” to loan the sculptures to Greece.

Greece has not yet responded to the suggestion, perhaps because it could imply a tacit acceptance of British ownership. But in January it adopted a similar arrangement to display a Parthenon fragment from a Sicilian museum, a loan that paved the way for a permanent handover. A YouGov poll in November found that 59% of Britons favour the return of the marbles to Greece. Alternative solutions include dividing the sculptures, or, more fancifully, using robots to carve replicas for Britain to keep. Whatever the final deal, a homecoming for the marbles looks closer than ever.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which Japanese camera film company was established in 1934?

Wednesday: Which member of the Grimaldi family did Grace Kelly marry?

My ego only needs a good rhythm section.

Louis Armstrong
