The world in brief
April 10, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

China’s army simulated attacks against Taiwan during the second day of drills around the island. Chinese state media reported that multiple units carried out “simulated joint precision strikes on key targets”. On Saturday China said the three-day “combat readiness patrols” should be seen as “a serious warning against the Taiwan independence separatist forces”. The announcement came days after Tsai Ing-wen, Taiwan’s president, met Kevin McCarthy, America’s House speaker, in California. Taiwan’s defence ministry said it was monitoring the situation.

Israel’s armed forces claimed on Sunday to have hit targets inside Syria with artillery and drone strikes. The barrage came after rockets were fired overnight towards Israel from within Syrian territory. There has been an escalation of violence in the region since police conducted raids on the al-Aqsa mosque, the third holiest site in Islam, in Jerusalem this week.

Meanwhile Israelis have continued to push back against the government’s proposed judicial reforms, which have caused months of widespread protests. On Saturday tens of thousands of demonstrators rallied in Tel Aviv, despite a car ploughing into tourists—killing one man and injuring several other people—in the city the day before. Earlier on Friday two British-Israeli sisters were shot dead in the occupied West Bank.

Russian air strikes—including an attack that killed two people in Zaporizhia, a city in south-eastern Ukraine—prompted condemnation from Volodmyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president. “This is how the terrorist state marks [Orthodox] Palm Sunday”, he said. Pope Francis, meanwhile, pointedly prayed in his Easter message for God to “shed the light of Easter upon the people of Russia”.

Tesla, an electric-vehicle maker, announced that it will build a new battery factory in Shanghai—its second in the city. Construction of the site, which will produce Tesla’s large-scale lithium-ion battery, is set to begin towards the end of 2023. The American company’s new investment in China comes at a time when tensions between the two countries are running high.

Two residential buildings collapsed after an explosion in Marseille, a city in the south of France. The cause of the blast is not yet clear. A fire began shortly afterwards, complicating rescue efforts. Authorities say that up to eight people could be trapped under the rubble. Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, tweeted that his “thoughts” were with the people of Marseille.

Churchgoers from Rutland, a village in Britain, will return a French crucifix to its original home after 107 years. The oak crucifix, which originally hung in the church of Doingt-Flamicort, in northern France, was brought to Britain by a soldier who found it in the rubble of a battlefield during the first world war. The local British reverend called its restoration “a symbol of hope”.

Fact of the day: 150, the estimated number of countries in which China invests in building infrastructure, as part of the country’s Belt and Road Initiative. Read the full story here.


PHOTO: REUTERS
The Good Friday Agreement turns 25
Monday is the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement, the accord struck in 1998 to end sectarian violence in Northern Ireland. In the three decades of the Troubles, some 3,500 people were killed. Had the same level of violence continued, some 3,000 more would have died in the years since.

To commemorate the occasion, dignitaries are flying to Belfast, Northern Ireland’s capital. They include President Joe Biden (America helped broker the deal). The peace they are celebrating endures, more or less. Yet the agreement itself is broken. The power-sharing government it created has not operated for more than a year, because unionists suspended it in protest against trade arrangements with mainland Britain after Brexit. Between 1999 and 2022, the devolved government was absent 37% of the time.

That dysfunction has led, among other things, to a breakdown of the health service. The Northern Irish are thankful for 25 years of peace. But as the years pass, the absence of violence is no longer enough.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The IMF and the World Bank try to contend with climate change
The spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank will begin in Washington, DC, on Monday. Along with the war in Ukraine and covid-19, this year’s conflabs will be preoccupied with another problem: how to raise the cash poor countries need to cope with climate change.

One idea is the “Bridgetown initiative”, espoused by Mia Mottley, the prime minister of Barbados. It suggests allowing multilateral development banks to make riskier loans, which would channel more money to the countries most vulnerable to disasters such as storms or floods. The initiative also proposes creating a “Global Climate Mitigation Trust”, funded in part by $500bn-worth of SDRs, a quasi-currency issued by the IMF. But some economists worry about, in effect, creating money when inflation is high.

Some change seems likely. The World Bank has indicated that it may lower its equity-to-loan ratio (though only by 1%). That will not satisfy those calling for the world’s financial architecture to be remade to deal with rising temperatures.


PHOTO: REX SHUTTERSTOCK
Turkey’s Kurdish party is threatened, but not finished
Polls put support for the People’s Democratic Party (HDP), Turkey’s main Kurdish party, at around 10%. Yet it may play an outsize role in the country’s parliamentary and presidential elections on May 14th—even if the party itself does not last that long.

Turkey’s constitutional court is considering a case, filed by state prosecutors, that could lead to the HDP being disbanded because of alleged links to armed Kurdish separatists. The case—the next hearing of which is scheduled for Tuesday—could also result in hundreds of the party’s leading members being banned from politics for five years.

The HDP is determined to press on. It recently decided to contest the parliamentary elections under the banner of another party, the Green Left, to sidestep the potential ban. And HDP is expected to endorse Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the main opposition candidate for the presidency. That could be enough to unseat the incumbent, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Mr Erodgan may have the HDP banned, but he cannot get rid of its voters.


PHOTO: EYEVINE
Can “Train Daddy” help Amtrak?
Andy Byford, a celebrated British public-transport executive, starts work as a senior vice-president at Amtrak, America’s passenger-rail system, on Monday. Mr Byford used to run the subway system for New York City, until he resigned in early 2020 after spats with Andrew Cuomo, the state’s then-governor. He improved dramatically the reliability of the subway: transport obsessives started referring to him as “Train Daddy”. On his last day dozens wearing masks of his face rode the train with him accompanied by, for some reason, a bagpiper.

He may find such success harder to achieve in his new role. At Amtrak Mr Byford will be in charge of trying to develop a high-speed intercity train network, which will require grappling with freight-train companies, railway unions and messy Washington, DC politics. But with the presidency of Joe Biden—dubbed “Amtrak Joe” because he was a regular commuter and is a fan of rail—and huge sums of money available for capital investments, there has probably never been a better time to try.


PHOTO: ZENITH RICHARDS / MET OPERA
An “opera in jazz” opens at the Met
The Metropolitan Opera in New York has played host to princesses, devils, ghosts and gods. On Monday night a black bisexual boxer will take centre stage. “Champion” tells the story of Emile Griffith, who in 1962 beat Benny Paret into a fatal coma during a match after the latter taunted him with homosexual slurs. Terence Blanchard, the composer of “Champion”, has described the work as “an opera in jazz”. A Grammy-award-winning trumpeter, Mr Blanchard has scored many of Spike Lee’s films.

In 2021 the Met opened its season with “Fire Shut Up in My Bones”, also by Mr Blanchard, with themes of poverty and sexual abuse. It was the first opera by a black composer ever staged at the house, and a sign that one of New York’s traditional institutions was finally diversifying its artistic offerings. That trend seems to be continuing: next season the Met will present “X”, an opera by Anthony Davis about the life of Malcolm X.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Monday: Aristotle founded his school of philosophy in which Athenian temple?

It is well that there is no one without a fault; for he would not have a friend in the world.

William Hazlitt
