The world in brief
March 27, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Ukraine’s security chief, Oleksiy Danilov, said Russia was holding Belarus “hostage” after the Kremlin said that it would place tactical nuclear weapons in the territory of its regional ally. He said the move would destabilise Belarus. On Saturday Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, told state television he had struck a deal with Alexander Lukashenko, his Belarusian counterpart. He said the decision did not violate nuclear non-proliferation agreements and was not unusual, as America did the same with its own allies.

Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, fired his defence minister, Yoav Gallant, after he urged the government to rethink plans to curtail the Supreme Court’s powers. Mr Gallant’s sacking was seen by some as a sign of Mr Netanyahu’s resolve: “Reform now!” tweeted Itamar Ben Gvir, the far-right national security minister. Protesters began gathering outside military headquarters in Tel Aviv.

The managing director of the International Monetary Fund, Kristalina Georgieva, warned that turmoil in the banking sector posed a threat to global financial stability. Investors fled from Deutsche Bank on Friday following the forced tie-up of Credit Suisse and UBS last week. Ms Georgieva, speaking in Beijing, said that risks to the world economy were piled “exceptionally high” amid monetary tightening.

Donald Trump told a rally in Waco, Texas, that “radical left maniacs” in America’s government were persecuting him and that the election in 2024 would be the “final battle” in which Trumpism would prevail. The former president faces potential arrest by Manhattan prosecutors, as well as numerous other investigations. An estimated 15,000 people turned up to listen to Mr Trump, whose choice of venue was pointed—30 years ago a federal operation against a Waco-based cult left 80 people dead.

At least 29 migrants travelling on two separate boats drowned off the coast of Tunisia as they tried to cross the Mediterranean to Italy. Officials on the Italian island of Lampedusa say a record 2,000 people arrived in the 24 hours to Sunday morning. The worsening economic crisis in Tunisia and a crackdown on undocumented migrants are behind the outflow.

The first authorised protest took place in Hong Kong since the territory introduced a smothering national-security law in 2020. Conditions for the demonstration, against a building project, were onerous: the number of participants was limited to 100, each had to wear a numbered lanyard and no facemasks were allowed. Despite having locked up more than a thousand (often peaceful) protesters, the government insists freedom of assembly endures.

What’s the time in Lebanon? That depends on whether you follow the government’s decision to delay daylight saving until April 21st—in an apparent effort to please the Muslim majority, who can break their daily Ramadan fast an hour earlier—or the influential Maronite church, who as usual swapped to summer time early on Sunday. Confusion has ensued: Christian organisations, parties and schools, as well as some news channels, are running an hour ahead of their Muslim counterparts.

Fact of the day: 43,000. The number of people killed by drought in Somalia last year. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Taiwan’s former leader heads to China
On Monday Taiwan’s previous president, Ma Ying-jeou, heads to Nanjing in eastern China. His 12-day trip will be the first visit by a former leader of the self-governing island to the mainland since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949. Mr Ma, who was in office from 2008 to 2016, hails from the China-friendly Kuomintang (KMT). He does not plan to meet leaders in Beijing, but will pay homage to his ancestors during a visit to the central province of Hunan.

Mr Ma’s observance of a Tomb Sweeping Festival, which is celebrated on both sides of the Taiwan Strait, is seen as an attempt to highlight the countries’ shared heritage. Politicians from Taiwan’s ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) accuse him of serving China’s ambitions to annex the island. The rift comes as the DPP and KMT lay out competing visions to Taiwan’s 24m people ahead of a presidential election in January 2024. The DPP wants to underscore Taiwanese sovereignty; Mr Ma hopes that pulling the two sides closer socially can lower tensions.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Economic optimism in Germany
The mood among German businesses is getting rosier. At least that’s what a business-climate indicator published by Ifo, a research institute, is likely to show on Monday. The German Council of Economic Experts, an academic body, is also growing more upbeat. Its expectations for the economy have improved, compared with those of late 2022, according to a recent report. It now expects Germany’s GDP to grow by 0.2% this year, rather than contract. One boon: energy prices have dropped from last summer’s dizzying heights.

Even so, inflation is declining more slowly than many had hoped, which is dampening consumption. The council expects price levels in Germany to rise by 6.6% this year, then by 3% next year. And Klaus Mueller, the head of Germany’s energy regulator, warned recently that there was still a risk of natural gas running short next winter. The odds of that happening? It depends on the weather and on consumers (both industrial and residential) continuing to save gas.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Scotland gets a new leader
The ruling party in Scotland will get a new leader on Monday. A ballot of Scottish National Party members was triggered in mid-February by the resignation of Nicola Sturgeon, the leader since 2014. The winner will be sworn in as Scotland’s first minister on Wednesday. The two frontrunners are Humza Yousaf, the health secretary, and Kate Forbes, the finance minister.

Whoever prevails will face several difficult tasks. One is reuniting the party after a contest marked by infighting and criticism of its record in office since 2007. All three candidates have promised to lead Scotland to independence, but with popular support for separation flagging, that’s a distant prospect. And the SNP’s governing coalition with the Scottish Green Party may be put to a test. Ms Forbes and Ash Regan, the third of the candidates, are opposed to gender-recognition legislation, which the Greens have heavily promoted. A rift would weaken the alliance the two parties have created over independence.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
El Salvador’s never-ending state of exception
Monday marks a year since El Salvador introduced a “state of exception”. The emergency powers, which came in response to a spate of gang killings and are renewed monthly, suspend some constitutional rights. Security forces can arrest people without giving them a reason and hold them for long periods of time. Human-rights groups have criticised the heavy-handed tactics. Almost 2% of the adult population of 6.3m are now behind bars, including many innocent people.

But the crackdown remains popular. As does the man behind it: President Nayib Bukele enjoys an approval rating of over 90%. Many Salvadoreans are willing to overlook their leader’s increasingly authoritarian tendencies, which include co-opting institutions and threatening critics, largely because crime is falling. The murder rate has dropped and people say once-dangerous neighbourhoods are now safe. For now, the state of exception has become the norm.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Composting takes off in New York
On Monday, curbside composting comes to Queens in New York City. A trial, last autumn, in which composting bins were set up throughout the borough was a success: residents kept 5,760 tonnes of food scraps and garden waste from landfills. Eric Adams, New York’s mayor, wants the service rolled out across the entire city by the end of next year, which would make it the country’s biggest composting programme. (New York residents won’t be compelled to take part, however, unlike those in San Francisco and some other cities.)

Composting bins have long been available at farmers markets, but such efforts reached only “true believers”, according to Jessica Tisch, the city’s Sanitation Commissioner. Instead of waxing poetic about methane reduction, Ms Tisch and others talk up the benefits of unifying against a hated adversary: rats. Reported sightings of the rodents doubled year-on-year in 2022. Keeping food waste out of rubbish bags, says Mr Adams, is “dealing a blow to New York City’s number one enemy”.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Monday: Which actor, born Eugene Orowitz, played key roles in the TV series “Bonanza” and “Little House on the Prairie”?

History is a novel written by the people.

Alfred de Vigny
