The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 20 hours ago (03:04 GMT+1 / 10:04 Hong Kong)

Ukraine said that Russia was unsuccessfully trying to advance on several towns in the Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine. It reported heavy shelling and “fierce fighting” in the region, which has been a key focus of Russia’s invasion. Shelling was also reported in the Kherson region, where Ukraine is attempting a counter-offensive.

Kenya’s election commission said that William Ruto, Kenya’s deputy president, won the country’s presidential election, but four of the country’s electoral commissioners said they could not endorse the result. The team of Raila Odinga, the opposition candidate endorsed by Uhuru Kenyatta, the outgoing president, also cast doubts on the results, which they said could not be verified.

Prosecutors in Georgia notified Rudy Giuliani that he is a target of their criminal investigation into possible attempts by Donald Trump and his advisers to overturn the 2020 presidential-election results in the state. Mr Giuliani, then Mr Trump’s personal lawyer, spearheaded a misinformation campaign to keep his boss in power. He is scheduled to appear before the special grand jury on Wednesday in Atlanta.

The French army left Mali, ending a nine-year mission to support the African government against insurgents. France’s relationship with Mali has been strained since August 2020, when a junta took power. Jihadist violence in the Sahel has surged in recent years. Around 2,500 French personnel will remain in the region, mainly to provide air support.

China’s army said it had organised military drills in the sea and airspace around Taiwan, in response to a group of American politicians visiting the island. The members of Congress are visiting Taiwan two weeks after a trip by Nancy Pelosi, the speaker of their House of Representatives, caused a diplomatic rumpus between America, China and Taiwan. Ed Markey, the Democrat leading the five-person delegation, said he wanted to encourage “peace across the Taiwan Strait”.

Iran’s foreign ministry said that Salman Rushdie and his supporters were solely to blame for the attack on Mr Rushdie in New York on Friday. A spokesman said that “no one has the right to accuse Iran” of responsibility. In 1989 Iran issued a fatwa calling on Muslims to kill the novelist. Hadi Matar, the 24-year-old accused of attempted murder, pled not guilty on Saturday.

Britain approved a covid-19 vaccine designed to target the Omicron variant, becoming the first country to do so. The “Spikevax bivalent Original/Omicron” vaccine, made by Moderna, will likely be used in booster campaigns this autumn.

Fact of the day: 75%, the increase in extreme rainfall events over India’s central belt between 1950 and 2015. Read the full story.

Kenya’s new president (for now) is William Ruto

PHOTO: AP
In a country with a troubled voting history, Kenya’s presidential election had seemed to be going well. No previous count had seemed so transparent, with results forms posted online for all to scrutinise. But as it became apparent that William Ruto, the deputy president, would be declared the winner, chaos erupted.

Aides to Raila Odinga, Mr Ruto’s challenger, announced that the electoral commission had been compromised. The electoral commission itself then split. Four of its seven members questioned the result, giving neither explanation nor evidence. When the commission’s chairman, Wafula Chebukati, attempted to declare Mr Ruto’s victory, he was attacked by Odinga loyalists.

Mr Chebukati eventually succeeded in declaring that Mr Ruto had won 50.5% of the votes. But Mr Odinga, who is supported by the departing president, Uhuru Kenyatta, is certain to appeal.

Trump’s power is tested in the West

PHOTO: AP
Two primary elections on Tuesday will offer tests of Donald Trump’s hold over the Republican Party. The more consequential of the two is in Wyoming, where Liz Cheney will fight to keep the Republican nomination for the state’s seat in the House of Representatives. Ms Cheney has been the loudest Republican critic of Mr Trump since his supporters invaded the Capitol last year.

That has annoyed Ms Cheney’s party. In one recent survey only 28% of likely Republican voters said they would back her. Harriet Hageman, a lawyer endorsed by Mr Trump, looks set to head to Washington instead. (In deep-red Wyoming, the winner of the Republican primary is almost guaranteed to win the general election in November.)

In Alaska, meanwhile, Sarah Palin will attempt a comeback. The Trump-endorsed former governor and vice-presidential candidate is chasing the state’s lone House seat. Ms Hageman and Ms Palin may be on the ballots, but it is Mr Trump’s enduring influence that will be on observers’ minds.

Walmart’s dicey earnings

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The pandemic wrought havoc on American retailers’ schedules. Supply-chain logjams caused shortages and delays; demand, and prices, soared. Now shops have the opposite problem. Many stockpiled more inventory than consumers—cautious of spending as inflation eats into their wages—want. So retailers are posting heavy discounts in order to flog their goods.

Walmart will reveal how badly the trend has affected its bottom line when it reports second-quarter earnings on Tuesday. Customers have had little choice but to put up with rising food prices, which will have boosted Walmart’s huge grocery business. But sales of less essential higher-margin products, such as clothing, have slowed. The company has already warned investors to expect a 8-9% drop in earnings. Nor is it the only retailer investors are eyeing. Target, which has experienced many of the same problems, reports earnings on Wednesday.


Brazil’s presidential campaign kicks off

PHOTO: REUTERS
On Tuesday candidates for the Brazilian presidency, Congress and state governments will begin campaigning ahead of elections on October 2nd. There are 12 candidates in the presidential race, of which two are already well ahead. Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a former president, is polling at around 40%, more than ten points in front of Jair Bolsonaro, who is seeking re-election.

Mr Bolsanaro’s prospects have improved in recent weeks, thanks in part to prodigious handouts. In July he upped the value of a monthly cash-transfer programme which covers 10% of the population. His strategy seems to be working. Between January and August, his popularity grew by five percentage points among the poorest voters, and by ten among female voters, groups that usually disapprove of him. But Lula is still the frontrunner. So as well as handouts, Mr Bolsonaro (true to form) has started promoting conspiracy theories that the vote might be rigged.

How a simpler voice box sets mankind apart

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The human voice box, or larynx, is a fantastically subtle organ. From this fleshy, cartilaginous structure has emerged all the sung music and spoken languages of the world. And yet in other primates, near-identical biological arrangements produce only shrieks and grunts. Now research in Science, a journal, has explained why humans alone possess the gift of speech. By scanning the larynges of 43 non-human primate species, scientists may have found what separates man from monkey.

The answer is not a missing link but an extra one. The larynx of every primate other than humans contains additional membranes called vocal lips. Experiments on anaesthetised monkeys, along with acoustic modelling, confirm that these make for unstable, irregular vocalisation. At some point in evolutionary history humans shed these membranes, yielding a simpler and more controllable voice box. By enabling the capacity for speech, this may have been a key step in the ascent of man. In evolution, as in speech, less is often more.

Falling out of love is like losing weight. It’s a lot easier putting it on than taking it off.

Aretha Franklin
