The world in brief April 26, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 22:11 GMT+1 / 05:11 Hong Kong
Texas gunman shared plans on Facebook, deteriorating conditions in Sievierodonetsk, and more

​​The 18-year-old gunman in Uvalde, Texas, shared on Facebook his plans to attack a school shortly before the massacre on Tuesday, officials said. Meta, Facebook’s parent company, said the posts were private one-to-one messages. Salvador Ramos shot his grandmother—who survived—at home before gunning down 19 children and two adults at the elementary school. All those killed and injured in the attack were in the same classroom.

The governor of the eastern Ukrainian region of Luhansk warned that the Russian army is trying to “completely destroy” the city of Sievierodonetsk. Conditions in the city are deteriorating. A statement on Tuesday by Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, claiming that the invaders deliberately slowed down their offensive to allow civilians to avoid the conflict, was dismissed as a lie by Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky.

Federal Reserve officials mulled raising interest rates high enough to slow economic growth in order to curb inflation, according to minutes from the central bank’s meeting in May. Instead, most monetary policymakers thought it appropriate to raise rates by 0.5 percentage points at the Fed’s next two meetings. Yet the minutes suggested that “a restrictive stance of policy may well become appropriate” in future.

A final report into the parties held at Downing Street and other locations during covid-19 lockdowns in Britain placed the blame on senior leadership. Speaking in parliament soon after the release, Prime Minister Boris Johnson said he was “humbled” and had “learned a lesson” but defended his attendance at staff farewells. He said he was “appalled” by the treatment of security and cleaning staff. The full 37-page report by Sue Gray, a senior civil servant, upheld the conclusions of her damning interim report from January 31st, and said “many will be dismayed that behaviour of this kind took place on this scale at the heart of government”.

Elon Musk committed to providing an additional $6.25bn in equity financing to fund his purchase of Twitter, according to filings from America’s Securities and Exchange Commission. The deal has stalled since the company’s board accepted Mr Musk’s $44bn offer last month. At their annual shareholder meeting on Wednesday, Twitter executives declined to comment on the takeover.

Violent clashes broke out across Pakistan after Imran Khan, the country’s former prime minister who was ousted in April, began a banned march on the capital, Islamabad, calling for government change. Police cordoned off the city with dozens of shipping containers. In Punjab, the most populous province, tear-gas and batons were used on protesters who forced barricades on the highway to Islamabad.

Pfizer will offer its patented medicines, including its covid-19 vaccine, to 45 poor countries at costs. The initiative will be first launched in Ghana, Malawi, Rwanda, Senegal and Uganda. The company had faced criticism as other manufacturers, including Britain’s AstraZeneca and America’s Johnson & Johnson, temporarily sold their vaccines on a non-profit basis in mid-2021.

Fact of the day: 900, the number of shootings on school grounds in America since the massacre at Sandy Hook a decade ago. 

Alibaba’s faltering fortunes

In the early days of the covid-19 pandemic, lockdowns and other restrictions keeping people at home boosted demand for online shopping and delivery services in China. For companies such as Alibaba, an e-commerce giant, and Meituan, a delivery super-app, business was brisk for much of 2020. But two years on, and with China still maintaining a zero-covid strategy, the restrictions have started to hurt consumers’ disposable incomes and hence demand. The outlook for Alibaba has darkened considerably, too.

When the company reports quarterly earnings on Thursday, analysts expect it to suffer a drop in profits of at least 50% from the previous quarter. This is partly due to weaker demand for its services. But it is also because Alibaba has been one of the main targets of a government crackdown on big tech groups. Lockdowns are slowly lifting and some analysts believe the “techlash” might ease, too. If that’s true, Alibaba could make a (slow) recovery.

Mariupol’s defenders redefined in Russia

For 12 improbable weeks Ukraine’s Azov regiment held out against Russian troops in the city of Mariupol. On Thursday Russia’s Supreme Court is expected to declare it a “terrorist organisation”.

The controversial military formation, which has some historical links to the far right, has already been designated an “extremist” organisation by Russia. The additional ruling appears to be in preparation for a show trial of soldiers who surrendered to Russian forces earlier this month. Kremlin propagandists have frequently used the example of Azov to justify its brutal war, which it describes as a “military operation” to “denazify” Ukraine.

Little is known about the internationally brokered deals that preceded Ukraine’s decision to surrender in Mariupol. Government officials refuse to comment, saying any statement could endanger the safety of its servicemen. There does appear to have been some commitment to an eventual prisoner exchange—but not necessarily before a demonstrative trial.

Not yet the end of Davos man

The annual meeting of the World Economic Forum, which wraps up on Thursday, is a study in contrasts—especially between the well-heeled insiders cloistered in Davos and the billions of outsiders on whose fate they pontificate. This time the big disparity was between gloom about the world and the joys of shoulder-rubbing in person (minus the snow) after a two-and-a-half-year pandemic hiatus.

War (in Ukraine), pestilence (the lingering effects of covid-19, especially in China) and famine (which looms in the form of sky-high food prices) topped a cheerless agenda. Covid policy kept most Chinese away; Vladimir Putin’s war meant Russians were banned. Attendance was down by perhaps half on previous years, and companies reined in the parties and pizzazz. If all this made Davos less useful than usual, it was not quite useless. Attendees reported enjoying the frank back-room chats more than ever. Collectively, they can add up to something meaningful. Don't write off Davos man yet.

South Sudan’s arms embargo

The world’s youngest country has age-old problems. Established in 2011, South Sudan has spent much of its first 11 years embroiled in ethnic-based conflict over power and access to oil revenues. On one side are forces loyal to the president, Salva Kiir; on the other, those aligned with the vice-president, Riek Machar. A peace deal signed in 2018 ended five years of civil war. But elements of it are ignored or used as grounds for more patronage and graft. Lack of progress on the peace deal, outlined recently in a damning report written by UN-appointed observers, means the UN on Thursday is likely to vote to extend an arms embargo and asset freezes.

For ordinary South Sudanese, life is grim. NGOs have documented widespread human-rights abuses. In March the World Food Programme warned of the country’s “worst hunger crisis ever”. The fruits of independence seem increasingly bitter.


Translating a Booker prize into success


Previous winners of the International Booker Prize, for books translated into English, have been well rewarded for their years of solitary toil. Han Kang, an author from South Korea who won in 2016, recently signed a two-book deal with Hamish Hamilton, a British publishing house. “A Horse Walks Into A Bar”, David Grossman’s winning title from 2017, has been adapted into a play. And Olga Tokarczuk’s International Booker gong in 2018 for “Flights” presaged a Nobel prize in literature.

The Polish author—along with her translator, Jennifer Croft—is the favourite again going into this year’s ceremony, which takes place on Thursday. (The prize money of £50,000, or $62,500, is shared equally between author and translator.) Ms Tokarczuk’s latest novel, “Books of Jacob”, is a wild, unruly beast. At more than 900 pages the story spans seven borders, five languages and three religions. But perhaps “Heaven” by Mieko Kawakami, a hit Japanese novelist, translated by Sam Bett and David Boyd, will stage a divine intervention.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which hedge fund manager founded the Robin Hood Foundation with the aim of reducing poverty?

Wednesday: What is the capital of the German state of Lower Saxony?

