The world in brief
May 18, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The World Meteorological Organisation said there is a 66% likelihood that global average temperatures will exceed their pre-industrial levels by 1.5°C for at least one year within the next five years. Last year the UN agency put the odds of that happening between 2022 and 2026 at 48%; in 2015 they were near zero. Keeping long-term global warming beneath 1.5°C was the more ambitious target of the Paris agreement signed in 2015.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, announced a two-month extension to the Black Sea grain deal between Ukraine and Russia. The agreement, which was brokered by Turkey and the UN and allows Ukraine to export crops through key ports, was due to expire on Thursday. It is a diplomatic win for Mr Erdogan, who is seeking re-election in a run-off vote on May 28th.

Nicolas Sarkozy, a former president of France, lost his appeal against a conviction for corruption and influence-peddling. He will now, as planned, serve a year at home wearing an electronic tag (the other two years of his three-year sentence were suspended). Mr Sarkozy, a centre-right president from 2007 to 2012, was convicted in 2021 of trying to bribe a judge after he left office.

Ecuador’s right-wing president, Guillermo Lasso, dissolved the country’s opposition-controlled parliament, ending impeachment proceedings against him. On Tuesday Mr Lasso appeared before congress on charges of alleged embezzlement, which he denies. Mr Lasso invoked a constitutional clause which allows him to rule by decree for six months until an election. The opposition had promised to hold protests should that clause be used.

The UN’s aid agency says it needs $2.6bn to help humanitarian efforts in Sudan, as fighting continues between the Sudanese army and the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary group. Some 25m people—more than half the country’s population—need aid and protection, according to the UN. 900,000 people have been displaced so far in the conflict.

Japan’s economy expanded by an annualised rate of 1.6% between January and March, the first time in three quarters it has grown. That was faster than economists’ predicted growth rate of 0.7%. Strong domestic demand helped offset declining exports, which fell for the first time in six quarters. Japanese stocks rose to a 33-year high on Wednesday.

A near-complete Hebrew Bible from the tenth century was auctioned by Sotheby’s for $38.1m. It is the second-highest fee paid at auction for a historical document, bested only by a $43m copy of America’s constitution. The buyer of the manuscript, called the Codex Sassoon, was Alfred Moses, an American lawyer who will donate it to the ANU-Museum of the Jewish People in Israel.

Fact of the day: 4.9m, the number of adult children living with their parents in Britain in 2021, up from 4.2m in 2011. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China courts Central Asia
On Thursday the leaders of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan will gather in Xi’an, a city in central China, for the inaugural China-Central Asia Summit. The event, hosted by China’s president, Xi Jinping, reflects growing ties between the “Stans” and their mighty eastern neighbour.

It is savvy diplomacy for China. The five Central Asian states are sandwiched between China’s far-western Xinjiang province and Russia. Boosting strategic alliances there offers China better control of one of its most restive regions and expands its influence into an area that Russia considers its backyard.

The Central Asian states stand to gain, too. China is a source of trade, energy and investment, and can act as a counterweight to Russia, their one-time ruler and current ally. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine set off alarm bells in the Stans. Their leaders hope a stronger relationship with China could help them avoid a similar fate.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Alibaba’s baby boom
Investors are excited about the birth of a new Chinese tech creature: the “Baby Baba”. Ever since Alibaba, an e-commerce giant, announced in March that it would break itself into six divisions, the prospect of several jumbo initial public offerings has tantalised bankers and portfolio managers. Alibaba’s progeny promise to be extremely lucrative: Cainiao, the logistics group, could be valued at $20bn. A collection of overseas e-commerce businesses could be worth even more. One Baby Baba will come with the company’s own version of ChatGPT, cashing in on the popularity of AI-powered chatbots.

Alibaba might say more about its next generation on Thursday, when it posts its earnings for the first quarter of 2023 and for the 2022-23 fiscal year. The report will also give investors a glimpse of how its core e-commerce unit has performed since China abandoned its zero-covid policy and ended lockdowns. Like all expectant parents, Alibaba will hope for a better world for its offspring.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
SCOTUS’s busy end of term
In recent weeks America’s Supreme Court has been dogged by ethics scandals. But its nine justices have little time to be distracted. This week, opinion releases will accelerate: by the end of June the court will hand down rulings on dozens of cases that were argued between October and April. At least one judgment will come on Thursday.

Nearly a year ago the court’s conservative majority erased Roe v Wade. It is now expected to overturn a 1970s-era precedent upholding the constitutionality of race-based affirmative action in university admissions, a policy designed to remedy the consequences of discrimination and make student bodies more diverse. Such a ruling would force universities to change the way they do that.

A number of other cases also address hot-button issues. They concern: a web designer who will not create websites for gay weddings; the legality of strikes that damage company property; internet companies’ liability for their algorithms; race and voting rights; and President Joe Biden’s student debt-relief programme.


PHOTO: EYEVINE
Regulators are coming for crypto
On Thursday crypto-enthusiasts from across the world will descend upon Miami for Bitcoin2023. The mood at the conference will be somewhat cooler than the city’s stifling weather.

After a year of crashes and scams the cryptosphere is suffering from a crisis of public trust. On Tuesday the European Union unveiled rules that will make crypto exchanges liable for losing customers’ assets and require crypto firms to be licensed.

Other countries have gone even further. Of 45 economies studied by the Atlantic Council, a think-tank, 25 have fully or partially banned crypto. In March American regulators brought charges against Binance, the world’s largest exchange, for failing to stop Americans from using its foreign platform. Firms are fleeing to friendlier states like Dubai, which has created a regulatory body aimed at attracting crypto activity. Miami is a good place for a crypto conference, but the industry’s future may be elsewhere.



PHOTO: MAT HENNEK
The musical range of Hélène Grimaud
Hélène Grimaud will perform a solo recital of Beethoven, Brahms and Bach at the Barbican Centre in London on Thursday. The concert is billed as “an evening of delightful musical contradictions”, with the “free-spirited” French pianist applying her “radical approach” to the music of three of the world’s most famous composers.

Ms Grimaud is known for mixing the traditional and the novel, combining classical performances such as Thursday’s concert with quirkier projects. An environmentalist and human-rights activist, she founded a wolf sanctuary in New York state and has worked with figures such as Nitin Sawhney, an electronica composer.

Ms Grimaud’s latest recording is “Silent Songs”, a selection from a song cycle of the same name composed in the 1970s by Valentin Silvestrov, Ukraine’s greatest living composer. Ms Grimaud, long an admirer of Mr Silvestrov, met him in August last year, after the 85-year-old had left battle-scarred Kyiv for Berlin. In “Silent Songs” she accompanies Konstantin Krimmel, a German-Romanian baritone, who sings Mr Silvestrov’s settings of English, Russian and Ukrainian poetry.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which Australian male tennis player won his only Grand Slam title at Wimbledon in 1987?

Wednesday: Which film director was responsible for a range of 1970s comedies including “Blazing Saddles” and “Young Frankenstein”?

The good life is one inspired by love and guided by knowledge.

Bertrand Russell
