The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (03:53 GMT+1 / 10:53 Hong Kong)

Hurricane Ian made landfall near Fort Myers, Florida. With wind speeds near 150mph (240kph), Ian is just shy of the category-five designation, the most severe; it is set to become one of the strongest storms on record to wallop America’s mainland. More than 800,000 people are already without power. Storm surges up to 18ft (5m) are expected along the coast of south-western Florida. Earlier Cuba experienced a blackout.

The Bank of England said it would start buying long-dated government bonds in a bid to calm markets and protect pension funds. The bank warned of a “material risk to UK financial stability” if chaos in the bond market continued. Trouble began after Kwasi Kwarteng, the chancellor, announced a new fiscal policy on Friday which triggered a collapse in the value of sterling, now around $1.09.

America’s stockmarket indices closed higher on Wednesday, ending several days of declines. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose by 1.9% and the S&P 500 by 2%. One exception to the rally was Apple: the tech firm’s shares dipped on a news report that it would not increase production of the new iPhone amid lacklustre demand.

The EU said leaks from Nord Stream 1 and 2, major gas pipelines under the Baltic sea, were caused by sabotage, but stopped short of blaming Russia. Ursula Von Der Leyen, head of the European Commission, said deliberate disruption would receive the “strongest possible response”. Ms von der Leyen also proposed a new set of sanctions on Russia, including an oil price cap.

Nicaragua’s government declared the EU’s ambassador to the country persona non grata, setting the stage for her expulsion. On Monday the EU said Nicaragua should take efforts to “restore genuine democracy”. In recent years Daniel Ortega, Nicaragua’s autocratic president, has locked up opposition politicians and silenced critics in the press.

SATS, a Singapore-based air freight and passenger services firm, agreed a $2.1bn deal to buy Worldwide Flight Services, the world’s biggest air cargo handler. The resumption of international travel as covid restrictions have eased has prompted a number of similar deals which bet on demand for logistics services rising.

Two firms developing an experimental Alzheimer’s drug published the results of a large clinical trial which shows it to have slowed down patients’ cognitive decline. Biogen and Eisai announced that their new medicine had reduced the disease’s progression by 27% compared with a placebo. Previous attempts to treat Alzheimer’s with drugs have been beset by high-profile failures.

Fact of the day: 60%, the share of the Middle East’s GDP made up by the booming Gulf States, the highest percentage since 1981. Read the full story.

What drives the world’s most powerful person?

PHOTO: AP
In just over two weeks the Chinese Communist Party will hold its party congress, the most important event in China’s political calendar. Xi Jinping will almost certainly be granted a third five-year term as leader, an event unprecedented since the long reign of Mao Zedong ended in 1976.

Over his ten years in charge Mr Xi has shattered decades of cautious, collective leadership and hoarded enormous personal power. Chinese officials argue he needs it to guide the country through global turmoil and turn it into a superpower. Many ordinary Chinese agree. The Prince, our first long-form podcast series, tells the story of Mr Xi’s life, including his traumatic childhood. It is a tale of power in China: how it is won, how it is wielded, and how far some have fallen when it’s taken away.

A genocide suspect faces trial

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Thursday Félicien Kabuga will go on trial in The Hague, at a special court set up by the UN in the aftermath of the bloodshed in Rwanda in 1994. The octogenarian faces charges of genocide and crimes against humanity. He has previously pleaded not guilty, and is likely to do so again.

Once one of Rwanda’s richest men, Mr Kabuga is alleged to have bankrolled ethnic Hutu extremists during the genocide, in which up to 800,000 Rwandans were murdered, mainly of the ethnic Tutsi group. An ally of Rwanda’s then-ruling party, Mr Kabuga stands accused of creating, supplying and arming the Interahamwe, a Hutu militia responsible for most of the killing. He also helped found Radio Mille Collines, a radio station that spouted murderous anti-Tutsi propaganda.

After the genocide Mr Kabuga became one of the world’s most wanted men; he was finally arrested in Paris in May 2020. There are many questions about how he managed to evade capture for so long. But now, finally, prosecutors have their man exactly where they want him.

Voting on the future of the internet

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
The International Telecommunication Union will elect its next secretary-general on Thursday at its quadrennial conference. In a throwback to the cold war, the vote pits an American against a Russian: Doreen Bogdan-Martin, one of the ITU’s three directors, takes on Rashid Ismailov, a telecoms executive who was once Russia’s deputy minister of telecoms. Even at this late stage, the vote looks too close to call.

Some see the election as a vote on the future of the digital realm. If Ms Bogdan-Martin wins, it will be a sign that most of the ITU’s 193 member countries would prefer the internet to remain a freewheeling, decentralised global network of networks, governed mostly by consensus, where all interested parties have at least some say. If Mr Ismailov prevails, it would mean that the world prefers a model that Russia, but also China, have been pushing for: one that looks more like the telephone system of old—a centralised edifice controlled largely by national governments.

Porsche’s luxury IPO

PHOTO: AFP
Not every petrolhead can afford a Porsche. But the initial public offering of the German luxury carmaker on Thursday could give fans a chance to own a small share of the company. In a nod to Porsche’s most iconic model, its current owner, Volkswagen Group, will sell 911m shares at up to €82.50 ($80) each, although only 114m, with no voting rights, will be sold to the public and big investors. The rest will be held by VW, and VW’s largest shareholders, the familial descendants of Porsche’s founders.

The IPO therefore values the most profitable part of VW at €75bn, making it one of the world’s biggest carmakers by market capitalisation. The cash raised will help to pay for VW’s transition to electrification. But if Porsche is to reap the benefits of its tie-up with VW, the erstwhile parent must get a grip on Cariad, its in-house software unit. Problems there have already forced Porsche to postpone the launch of one new model, its e-Macan small SUV. Not the sort of snafu that Porsche is used to.

End of an era for “FIFA”

PHOTO: DREAMSTIME
Electronic Arts, an American company, releases “FIFA 23” this week, the latest edition of its hugely popular football video game. Having sold more than 325m copies since its inception in 1993, every “FIFA” release is an eagerly anticipated event in the gaming calendar. This one, however, is particularly poignant. It marks the end of a successful collaboration between EA and FIFA, football’s governing body.

FIFA earns an estimated $150m every year for lending its name to the series. It now hopes to rake in more through new games developed with other studios. Some fans will welcome the shake-up. Recent editions of “FIFA” have been criticised for merely repackaging it without any meaningful changes to gameplay or features. The introduction of in-game purchases has been controversial, too, as gaming purists consider a “pay-to-win” model inherently unfair. Such controversies prompted another developer, Strikerz Inc., to enter the market on its own. Through “Ultimate Football League”, which launches in 2023, Strikerz promises to deliver a so-called “fair-to-play” experience, meaning it rewards gamers for their skill rather than their money.


Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which town in Maryland shares its name with an American comedian?

Wednesday: Which American comedian replaced Johnny Carson as host of “The Tonight Show” in 1992?

Nothing develops intelligence like travel.

Emile Zola
