The world in brief July 9, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 23:14 GMT+1 / 06:14 Hong Kong

Elon Musk ended his takeover bid for Twitter, according to a letter to the social-media firm from his lawyers. It cited “false and misleading” statements made by Twitter before the deal was agreed on. For weeks Mr. Musk had threatened to abandon the $44bn purchase, alleging the firm had underrepresented the number of bot accounts on its site. The merger involved a $1bn termination fee. Twitter’s board said it would sue to enforce the acquisition agreement.

Police in Japan said the 41-year-old man who assassinated Abe Shinzo, the former prime minister, used a handmade gun. Mr Abe was shot while making a speech in the western city of Nara ahead of parliamentary elections on Sunday; he was pronounced dead nearly six hours later. Japan has extremely strict gun laws and shootings there are highly unusual; so is political violence. An outpouring of tributes from world leaders demonstrated Mr Abe’s imprint on geopolitics.

America’s employment numbers beat expectations, with 372,000 jobs added in June, the Department of Labor reported. The number of jobs added was previously forecast to be 265,000. The unemployment rate stayed unchanged, at 3.6%. The new report figures may ease fears of a recession.

Rishi Sunak, Britain’s former chancellor, threw his hat in the ring in the contest to replace Boris Johnson as the next leader of the Conservative Party and thus prime minister. He said he would not tell “comforting fairy tales”, a reference to his fiscal-policy disagreements with Mr. Johnson, who favored looser purse strings. The timetable to replace Mr. Johnson will be determined next week. He intends to stay on as prime minister until that contest is concluded.

José Eduardo dos Santos, who was president of Angola for nearly 40 years, died in Barcelona, where he was living in self-imposed exile. Mr dos Santos, who stepped down in 2017, was 79. His rule was marked by a protracted civil war, repression and widespread government corruption that enriched his own family.

President Joe Biden signed an executive order on Friday to safeguard the right to abortion in America. The executive order expands access to medication abortion, contraception and emergency medical care. It also convenes volunteer lawyers to provide legal counsel and promotes outreach and public education.

A regional official in Ukraine warned that Severodonetsk, a city in eastern Ukraine, is facing a “humanitarian disaster” almost two weeks after being captured by Russian forces. Months of conflict have badly damaged the city’s critical infrastructure, the official said, leaving it without power, water, or a functional sewage system.

Word of the week: “revenge travelling”, to describe pent-up demand for getaways after time spent at home in the pandemic. 

After Abe’s assassination
Abe Shinzo, Japan’s former prime minister, was fatally shot on Friday as he delivered a stump speech ahead of elections to the upper house of the Diet scheduled for Sunday. Kishida Fumio, the current prime minister, pledged to hold the vote despite the killing, vowing to “protect our democracy” and “not succumb to violence”. The election had been seen as an opportunity for Mr Kishida to pull away from Mr. Abe’s influence within the ruling Liberal Democratic Party. Instead, he will be scrutinized over his management of the fallout from his predecessor's assassination.

Japan has long seen itself as a peaceful place: guns are strictly regulated and political violence rare. (Japan recorded only one gun death in 2021.) But that sense of safety dissipated in an instant when the 41-year-assassin felled Mr. Abe. “I feel a sense of crisis, that the foundation of our democracy is shattered,” wrote Hirakawa Eri, a prominent political journalist. Many Japanese feel the same.

China’s inflation exceptionalism
First in Latin America, then in Eastern Europe and finally in Asia, inflation has ripped through low and middle-income countries. It now exceeds the official target in every big emerging economy bar one, points out Natalia Gurushina of VanEck, a mutual-fund manager. The exception, of course, is China. Figures out on Friday will probably show that consumer-price inflation remains below the government’s target of 3%.

That may not be the case for much longer. Pork prices have begun to rise. And the government is preparing a big infrastructure push that could exceed 7trn yuan ($1trn) this year, according to Morgan Stanley. What might keep inflation at bay is another outbreak of covid-19 and a repeat of the lockdowns that crippled large parts of the economy in April and May. New infections in three provinces and Shanghai look ominous. It is not easy to slay inflation. But killing the economy is one way to do it.


Love Parade returns to Berlin
It has been nearly 20 years since Berlin pulsed to the beat of the Love Parade, a free, annual techno-music festival. On Saturday sound systems will blare for its successor: the Rave the Planet Parade.

Love Parade grew from 150 ravers in 1989 to 1.5m at its peak a decade later. But when local authorities and festival organizers fought over security and cleaning expenses, the party was called off. In 2005 the brand was sold to a businessman, who later moved the event outside the German capital. In 2010, after 21 partygoers died in a crush at a festival in Duisburg, the new owner vowed there would be no more.

But Rave the Planet Parade is Love Parade reincarnated. Dr Motte, the DJ who helped organize the early parties, is back behind the decks. The organizers have even applied for Berlin’s techno scene to be recognized by UNESCO. And they are looking for volunteers to help clean up the next day.

“Thor”: What is it good for?
Marvel’s last film, “Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness”, conjured up $450m at the global box office on its opening weekend in May. Hopes are therefore high for “Thor: Love and Thunder”, which is released in America this weekend. But the Asgardian superhero’s fourth film does not warrant thunderous applause.

Like “Thor: Ragnarok” in 2017, the new film is a self-parodying interstellar romp directed by Taika Waititi, of “Jojo Rabbit” fame. This time, though, the jokey irreverence and eccentric plotting come at the expense of narrative urgency. If Thor (a gym-honed Chris Hemsworth) and his newly superpowered girlfriend Jane (Natalie Portman) are meant to be rescuing a group of kidnapped children from a mass-murdering alien (Christian Bale), why are they wandering around the galaxy trading sitcom quips?

Thor is the first character in the Marvel Cinematic Universe to have enjoyed four solo films. Three would have been plenty.

Weekend profile: Xiao Jianhua, a tycoon in trouble with Chinese authorities
The year before he was abducted by Chinese agents from his suite in Hong Kong, Xiao Jianhua was worth an estimated $6bn. He made his riches brokering deals for some of China’s elite political families, often helping to scoop up or offload valuable stakes in companies. But his connections to the ruling class also led to his downfall. Mr Xiao, aged 50, is on trial in Shanghai, although the details of the charges and proceedings against him are secret.

The entrepreneur grew up poor in the eastern province of Shandong but in the 1980s won a spot at Peking University, one of China’s leading schools. Amid the student protests in Beijing in 1989 that led to bloodshed in Tiananmen Square, Mr. Xiao remained loyal to the Communist Party and opposed the demonstrations. This probably helped win the trust of the powerful families who would support his business. His company, Tomorrow Group, grew rapidly and expanded across industries such as natural resources, property and finance.

It was no ordinary business. Mr Xiao developed a reputation as a “bagman” for the elite—someone who brokers investments for politicians’ relatives. In 2006 he was linked to the privatisation of a large power company in his home province. The son of Zeng Qinghong, one of China’s highest-ranking officials, was behind the deal. In 2013 Mr Xiao brokered a deal to sell shares in a company owned by the sister and brother-in-law of Xi Jinping, the country’s president. The next year he admitted those connections to the New York Times. That may have been a fatal mistake.

Perhaps sensing that the political winds could shift, in 2008 Mr Xiao acquired Canadian citizenship. Shortly after the Times report he fled to Hong Kong and took up residence in the Four Seasons hotel. He was rarely seen in public and was often surrounded by female bodyguards. In early 2017 Mr Xiao was abducted from his room by Chinese agents, who whisked him back to the mainland. Tomorrow Group collapsed. Several of his assets, such as Baoshang Bank, required state bailouts. For the past five years he has been assisting financial authorities unwind his crumbling business empire.

Mr Xiao’s trial suddenly kicked off in Shanghai on July 4th but little is known about it. The only official confirmation of it has come from Canada’s foreign ministry. Given the dirt he has on China’s ruling class it is very likely that the proceedings will remain secret.


The winners of this week’s quiz

Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random from each continent, were:

Asia: Shin Inagaki, Tokyo, Japan

North America: Wanda Nagel, Kelso, United States

Central and South America: Martin Whittle, São Paulo, Brazil

Europe: Jonas Balciunas, Kaunas, Lithuania

Africa: Hasit Raja, Nairobi, Kenya

Oceania: Peter Sloane, Glen Iris, Australia

They all gave the correct answers of Copenhagen, Berkeley, Poland, Stockholm and Tennessee. The connecting theme is that all have elements named after them: Hafnium (after Hafnia, the Latin name for Copenhagen), Berkelium, Polonium, Holmium (after Holmia, the Latin name for Stockholm) and Tennessine.

When you put your hand to the plough, you can’t put it down until you get to the end of the row.

Alice Paul
