The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

January 3, 2023

Russia’s ministry of defence said that 63 servicemen had been killed in a Ukrainian attack on their quarters in Makiivka, a Russian-occupied town in the Donbas region. Some Ukrainian reports for the casualty figures are far higher. Separately, the latest barrage of Russian strikes on Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, caused electricity and heating shortages, according to Vitali Klitschko, the mayor. Ukraine’s defence ministry said the air force had shot down nearly 40 Iranian-made drones overnight.

A third of the world economy will fall into recession in 2023, according to the head of the IMF. Kristalina Georgieva said that global growth will be dragged down by the economies of America, China and the EU, which are “slowing simultaneously”. She predicted that half of the EU would enter a recession, but added that America “may avoid” one.

The lying-in-state of Pope Benedict XVI began in the Vatican. His body is displayed in an open casket in St Peter’s Basilica. Benedict, head of the Roman Catholic church from 2005 until his resignation in 2013, died on Saturday. His funeral will take place on Thursday. It is the first time that a serving pope will oversee the burial of one of his predecessors.

The president of the European Parliament announced that two unnamed MEPs implicated in a corruption scandal will begin to have their parliamentary immunity removed. Roberta Metsola said she was acting on a request from the Belgian police. In December Eva Kaili, a vice-president of the parliament, and three others were charged with corruption and money-laundering reportedly relating to the Gulf state of Qatar. All deny any wrongdoing, as does Qatar.

The Israeli army launched a missile strike on Syria’s international airport in Damascus, killing four people, including two soldiers, according to a British-based human rights monitor. The attack put the airport out of service. It was the second attack on the airport in seven months. The strikes, which targeted Iranian-backed groups in Syria, came days after a new, right-wing coalition government took office in Israel.

About 24 prisoners escaped from a prison in northern Mexico after it was attacked by heavily armed gunmen, probably members of a drugs cartel. At least ten guards and four inmates were killed during the assault on the Chihuahua state prison in Ciudad Juarez; fighting within the prison also left 13 injured. The border city has seen thousands of deaths from drugs-related violence in recent years.

Factory activity in South Korea fell for the sixth consecutive month in December, according to a business survey. Manufacturing firms were hit hard by the global economic slowdown and a strike by truckers. Meanwhile in Indonesia the annual inflation rate rose slightly in December to 5.5%, remaining well above the central bank’s upper limit of 4% for the seventh consecutive month.

Fact of the day: 16%. The number of Brazilians who do not get enough to eat, up from 6% just four years ago. Read the full article.

The battle for Republican leadership

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Before America’s House of Representatives broke up for Christmas, some Republican lawmakers were seen sporting a peculiar lapel badge. “OK”, it read, standing for “Only Kevin”: a rallying cry against the “Never Kevins”––rebel Republicans who had vowed to oppose Kevin McCarthy’s bid for House Speaker, the leader of the larger party in the chamber.

Mr McCarthy, who was the minority leader before Republicans took the House in November’s midterms, faces a tough vote on Tuesday. Unusually he is both a Donald Trump loyalist and an establishment figure. Hoping to convince the obstructionist Never Kevins, he has conceded to some of their demands, but between five and ten members remain unpersuaded––and he can afford to lose just four. Speaker contests are typically straightforward: none since 1923 has required more than a single vote. If Mr McCarthy fails on his first try, he will have to haggle with diminished leverage; others could also put their names forward. That will mean a chaotic start to the new congressional session for a Republican party already hobbled by division.

Mexico raises its minimum wage

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
This week the legal minimum wage in Mexico increases to 207.44 pesos ($10.55) a day, or 312.41 pesos for workers in the northern border area abutting the United States. Mexicans will welcome the extra cash, which represents a 22% rise on last year’s figure. Between 2018 and 2020 the poverty rate increased from 42% to 44% of the population, and the pandemic then made things worse. President Andrés Manuel López Obrador has continually increased the minimum wage since taking office in 2018. By 2026, he says, it should be sufficient to buy food for a family of four.

Still, not everyone likes the larger pay packets. Some economists fret the wage boost will push up inflation, already running high at 7.8%. Indeed, for the approximately 60% of Mexican workers who toil in the informal sector, that may be the only effect they see.

Labour markets are the bright spot in the world economy

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Amid all the talk about impending recession, there is one bright spot: labour markets. In most recessions unemployment soars, as firms stop hiring and lay off staff. After the 2008 financial crash, for example, the rich world’s unemployment rate rose from 5.8% to close to 9%. But at the beginning of 2023 there is scant evidence of labour-market carnage. Jobs numbers from America, out on Friday, will show that unemployment in the world's largest economy remains very low. Indeed, the biggest problem appears to be shortages of workers, not jobs. Wage growth is still exceptionally strong, especially given weak productivity growth.

Admittedly, there is evidence that labour demand is starting to weaken in some places. Notably, employment growth in America has slowed sharply from the dizzying heights of late 2021. Yet it would take an awful lot to return to the dark days of the early 2010s. At 4.9%, unemployment across the rich world is at its lowest level in decades.


Xi and Marcos smile for the cameras

PHOTO: PA
On Tuesday Ferdinand “Bongbong” Marcos, president of the Philippines, begins a state visit to China. Mr Marcos and Xi Jinping, China’s president, will stress the friendlier, commercial aspects of their countries’ relations, rather than their overlapping claims to parts of the South China Sea. There, fishing vessels crewed by Chinese militiamen persist in obstructing access to waters where international law gives the Philippines exclusive rights to catch fish, and to tap any oil and natural gas that may be found.

If these spats were to escalate into violence, America, as the Philippines’s ally, could be dragged in. Nobody wants war over seafood and what, for now, is the mere promise of gas, so Mr Xi and Mr Marcos will keep up the appearance of friendship. The pretence will last as long as the Philippines muffles its protests about Chinese bullying—and China moderates its strong-arm tactics.

Elena Ferrante on Netflix

PHOTO: NETFLIX
The coming-of-age tale is a literary staple. Fans of Elena Ferrante, an Italian superstar author, have devotedly followed her characters as they learn the harsh truths of adult life. The latest is Giovanna, a teenager in Naples whose tortured adolescence has now made it from page to screen. “The Lying Life of Adults,” an adaptation of Ms Ferrante’s most recent novel, is now streaming on Netflix worldwide.

The show shares themes with the television series of Ms Ferrante’s previous novels, a quartet beginning with “My Brilliant Friend”, which depicted the heroines Elena and Lila. It strips bare the ugliness of male entitlement and female rage, and seesaws between a poor working-class neighbourhood and the posh homes of wealthy intellectuals. But stylistically the programmes could not be more different. Whereas the first show was straightforward Hollywood, Giovanna’s story is more Italian new wave: fragmented and cryptic. Watch it for the visual treat and Ms Ferrante’s harsh truths: men are monsters—but women can be, too.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which novel by W. Somerset Maugham is based, in part, on the life of Paul Gauguin?

Monday: Which character in “Pride and Prejudice” proposes marriage to Elizabeth Bennet before marrying her best friend?

Since we humans have the better brain, isn’t it our responsibility to protect our fellow creatures from, oddly enough, ourselves?

Joy Adamson
