The world in brief May 21, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (04:35 GMT+1 London)
Fighting intensifies in Donbas “hell” and America approves $40bn for Ukraine


Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, described conditions in the east of the country as “hell” as an intensifying Russian bombardment has left the Donbas region “completely destroyed”. Ukraine has reported intense fighting around Lysychansk and Severodonetsk, two cities in the region. Russia is using artillery, rocket-launchers and aircraft. Many civilian targets have been hit. Mr Zelensky described a missile strike on a cultural centre in the Kharkiv region, in which seven people, including an 11-year-old child, were injured, as “absolute evil, absolute stupidity”.

The S&P 500 index ventured into bear market territory on Friday, for the first time since March 2020. Having taken a plunge amid fresh concerns about high inflation and slowing growth it then closed just above the bear-market threshold. With seven straight weeks of declines, the index has now seen its most prolonged fall since 2001. The Nasdaq Composite index has lost more than 30% this year.

A federal judge blocked plans by the Biden Administration to lift Title 42, a measure allowing border police to expel asylum-seekers and other migrants on the grounds of public health. The policy, put in place by then-president Donald Trump in 2020, was set to expire on May 23rd. America’s Department of Justice said it would appeal the ruling.

Gerhard Schröder, a former chancellor of Germany, finally stepped down from the board of Rosneft, a Russian energy company. Mr Schröder had come under increasing pressure from EU officials to cut his ties with Russia. On Thursday, Germany stripped him of some official perks, including a publicly-funded office. In recent days other foreign executives at Rosneft have reportedly quit. Mr Schröder may still join the supervisory board of Gazprom, another Russian energy giant, which is scheduled to happen in June.

Emmanuel Macron, France’s newly re-elected president, announced a new cabinet consisting largely of members of his previous one. Bruno Le Maire kept his job as finance minister, while Catherine Colonna, who leaves her post as ambassador to London, became foreign minister. More boldly, Pap Ndiaye, a historian and public intellectual who writes about race, was put in charge of education and Olivier Dussopt, a former member of the Socialist Party, given the task of enacting the president's controversial pension reform. On May 16th Mr Macron appointed the country’s first female prime minister in 30 years.

Virginia Thomas, wife of Clarence Thomas, a Supreme Court justice, urged lawmakers in Arizona to dismiss President Joe Biden’s win and appoint “a clean slate of Electors,” according to the Washington Post. It said that in November 2020 Mrs Thomas told two lawmakers, via email, they had “power to fight back against fraud.” Earlier this year the paper published texts by Mrs Thomas telling Donald Trump’s chief of staff to overturn the election.

Retail sales in Britain unexpectedly rose 1.4% in April, despite consumer confidence falling to its lowest level since the 1970s. The retail sales, driven by a boost in supermarket alcohol spending, may reflect a shift in consumer behaviour, with shoppers choosing to drink at home rather than pubs. Meanwhile, German producer prices in April were 33.5% higher than a year earlier, suggesting that German consumers will continue to face high inflation, too.

Phrase of the week: jogo de búzios, the throwing of shells for the telling of fortunes. This Afro-Brazilian tradition thrives in a changing country but is becoming more secular, and digital.