The world in brief
August 21, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Denmark and the Netherlands pledged to send F-16 fighters to Ukraine, finally granting the embattled country’s wish for Western warplanes. Deliveries of the American-made jet are expected to begin around the end of the year. Denmark said it would send 19 jets; the Dutch government is yet to decide whether to deliver its entire fleet of 42. Ukrainian pilots have already begun training. During a visit to the Netherlands Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, called the decisions “historic”.

Russia’s space agency, Roscosmos, said its Luna-25 probe had “ceased to exist” after colliding with the Moon’s surface. The lander had been scheduled to touch down near the Moon’s south pole on Monday, seeking evidence of frozen water. Roscosmos said it will launch an investigation into the cause of the crash. India’s rival lunar mission, Chandrayaan-3, will attempt a touchdown on Wednesday.

Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said the armed forces would be deployed to help fight wildfires spreading in British Columbia, a western province. Around 30,000 people have been ordered to evacuate, and another 36,000 put on alert. Around 140,000 sq km of land has burned in Canada this fire season, which could stretch into autumn, owing to dry conditions.

Pakistan’s president, Arif Alvi, said that he had refused to sign two bills tightening national-security laws. The bills were said to have gained his assent on Saturday, but the president, an ally of Imran Khan, a recently imprisoned former prime minister, took to social media to repudiate the claim, with “God as my witness”. The Law and Justice Ministry called Mr Alvi’s actions unconstitutional.

Australia will devote $1.7bn to long-range defence systems, its government said, as it continues to bolster its defence capability in the face of a rising threat from China. Most of that will be spent on Tomahawk cruise missiles, making Australia only the third country to stock the munitions, after America and Britain. Australia will also procure anti-radiation and anti-tank missiles.

Global investment in renewable energy reached a record $358bn in the first half of 2023, according to a report by BloombergNEF. Investment in China, particularly in its solar industry, accounted for about half of the total. American investment in solar energy also grew by 75% compared with the same period last year, to $25.5bn, as the Inflation Reduction Act incentivised green-energy projects.

Spain won the women’s World Cup with a 1-0 victory over England in Sydney. The result represents a maiden world championship for La Roja, while denying England’s Lionesses, the reigning European champions, their first such title. The tournament in Australia and New Zealand has been hailed as a landmark success for the women’s game.

Word of the week: Schuldenbremse, or “debt brake”, which bars Germany’s federal government from net borrowing of more than 0.35% of GDP. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A brutal election in Ecuador
Ecuadoreans head to the polls on Sunday to vote for a new president and legislature. The race has been marred by violence: three candidates have been assassinated in the past month. On August 9th Fernando Villavicencio, a leading presidential contender and anti-corruption crusader, was gunned down while leaving a rally. Mexican and Colombian narco-traffickers and the Albanian mafia are vying for control of increasingly important drug routes in Ecuador. The homicide rate has more than quadrupled since 2018. It now exceeds those of Mexico and Colombia.

The conservative incumbent, Guillermo Lasso, called the snap election in May after two impeachment attempts against him. The front-runner is Luisa Gonzáles, an ally of Rafael Correa, a powerful former left-wing president. Tough-on-crime outsider Jan Topic has risen to second place recently. A runoff on October 15th looks likely. The vote will coincide with a contentious referendum on whether to allow the expansion of oil drilling in the Amazon rainforest.


PHOTO: AFP
Separatist conflict in Mali
In jihadist-hit Mali there is a growing risk of yet another conflict: between Tuareg separatists and the army, which is backed by Wagner Group mercenaries. The country’s military junta, in charge after a coup in 2020, has ordered the more than 10,000 UN peacekeepers deployed in the country for a decade to leave. A big part of their mission was to support a 2015 peace deal between separatists and the government. Now disputes over who gets to take over UN bases have triggered bloody clashes in Ber in northern Mali.

Things could soon get worse. The UN plans to withdraw from more bases this month and is due to leave the whole country by the end of this year. Any attempt by the army to take over bases in the far north, especially in the separatist stronghold of Kidal, could prompt heavy fighting. Meanwhile jihadists have blockaded Timbuktu, another northern city. The last thing long-suffering Malians need is another war.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Good news in Guatemala?
Guatemala’s presidential election, which takes place on Sunday, may provide a rare bit of good news in Central America. Bernardo Arévalo, a foe of the country’s political establishment, enjoys a 22-percentage-point polling lead over his rival, Sandra Torres, a former first lady. Mr Arévalo, the candidate of Seed, a left-leaning party, pledges to tackle corruption and crime and to improve basic services for Guatemala’s 17m people. His victory would be an encouraging development after years of democratic backsliding.

But the path to power will not be smooth. Since Mr Arévalo’s unexpectedly strong showing in the first round in June a network of political, military and economic elites—branded by Guatemalans “the pact of the corrupt”—has tried to bar him from the second round. Many fear that the establishment will try to keep him out of power. That could spark huge protests at home and condemnation from abroad, and set the country on a dangerous path.


PHOTO: AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY
“Smart rust” cleans water pollutants
Some homeowners install special filters to remove rust from water. But now some German researchers are arguing that it might be better to add flecks back in. At a recent meeting of the American Chemical Society they presented findings showing how special nanoparticles of iron oxide—dubbed “smart rust”—could attract and bind to pollutants in water that are hard to extract otherwise.

The material has been used to remove microplastics, herbicides and crude oil from water samples. Now, by tweaking its chemical coating, the researchers have adapted smart rust to target specific pollutants such as oestrogen. The hormone, found in waste from humans and livestock, can have gender-bending effects on some organisms, like causing male fish to start developing eggs in their testes. And wastewater treatment lets oestrogen through—the effects of exposing humans to their low-levels over time are not yet clear. Helpfully, smart rust is superparamagnetic, which means that it does not clump, but can be withdrawn using an external magnet.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Sarina Wiegman, England’s greatest manager
When England won the football World Cup in 1966, few fans imagined that the country would have to wait nearly 60 years to appear in another such final, or that a female team would be the one to do so. Yet it is the Lionesses who are now one match away from World Cup triumph. On Sunday they face Spain in the final. Perhaps the most important reason for England’s success is Sarina Wiegman, a Dutchwoman who has coached England for barely three years. She may already be the greatest manager of any England football team, male or female.

Under Ms Wiegman’s stewardship, the Lionesses have lost just once in 38 matches. That run includes victory at the European Championship in 2022 (a trophy that has always eluded the men’s team). Ms Wiegman’s win record of 79% is higher than the 62% of Gareth Southgate, the current men’s coach, and the 61% of Sir Alf Ramsey, who led England in 1966. That is no fluke: before managing England Ms Wiegman led the Dutch women to a European Championship victory in 2017, and then to the World Cup final in 2019 (which ended in a loss to America).

Ms Wiegman is meticulous and diligent, and empowers her players. She knows when to be maternal, and when to be tough. Her demeanour on the sidelines resembles that of the physical-education teacher she once was. As a player in the Netherlands, to supplement her paltry income she taught at a school.

Nowadays women players can earn a living wage without side jobs. Still, management remains a male domain. Only 12 of the 32 managers at this year’s women’s World Cup were women. But gender disparities never discouraged Ms Wiegman. She grew up in more unequal times. As a child in The Hague she cut her hair to join boys’ kickabouts. Now such disguises are scarcely needed. In fact, the boys are now asking her to play: many fans want Ms Wiegman to manage the England men’s team next.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist:

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Space to manoeuvre around low gorge rim (7, 4)

1 across One way to send messages—even sweet talk (6)

2 across Unbounded alarm across United Nations, related to the moon (5)

3 across Out loud, contemplate bold hairstyle (6)

Factual clues

1 down What Britain’s post-Brexit internal market has less of than Europe’s (7, 4)

1 across A Chinese super-app (6)

2 across A type of ice that both India and Russia are currently racing to find (5)

3 across A hairdo enjoying a renaissance in America (6)



The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Caio Priszculnik, São Paulo, Brazil

Eckart Neumann, Hannover, Germany

Karen Roach, Grenada, Mississippi, America

They all gave the correct answers of Phoebe Waller-Bridge, Rachel Whiteread, joey, Ross ice shelf and ship chandler. The theme is characters in Friends: Phoebe, Rachel, Joey, Ross and Chandler.

The questions were:

Monday: Which British actor created the comedy “Fleabag”?

Tuesday: Which sculptor, the first woman to win the Turner prize, is best known for her cast of the inside of a terraced house?

Wednesday: What is the name for a baby kangaroo?

Thursday: What is the largest ice shelf in Antarctica, at almost 500,000 square kilometres?

Friday: What is the term for people who sell supplies and equipment for ships?

We first make our habits, and then our habits make us.

John Dryden
