The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 22, 2023

As two days of bilateral talks drew to a close, Xi Jinping, China’s president, and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, committed to greater economic cooperation. Mr Putin said that they had discussed China’s plan for ending the war in Ukraine, which has been disparaged by the West. He also claimed that the two nations were close to finalising an agreement on the Power of Siberia 2 pipeline, which would reroute Russia’s gas exports from Europe to China.

Janet Yellen, America’s treasury secretary, said that the American banking system is stabilising, but that the government would provide further support to smaller banks if necessary. Shares in several regional lenders rose at the news, including those in First Republic, a troubled mid-sized bank. Meanwhile, European bank stocks rose in early trading, as investors took heart from UBS’s acquisition of Credit Suisse.

Housing sales in America jumped by 14.5% in February from January as the median year-on-year home price fell for the first time in nearly 11 years. The rise in sales of previously-owned homes marks the first increase in 12 months as mortgage rates have started easing. In late October the interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages surpassed 7%; by early February it averaged around 6%.

Google launched its AI Chatbot, Bard, in Britain and America. The chatbot, a rival to OpenAI’s highly successful ChatGPT, will have access to up-to-date information on the internet, but will be run separately from its Google search engine. Last month Bard made an error in its first public demo, causing shares in Google’s parent company Alphabet to drop.

Uganda’s parliament passed a bill imposing the death penalty on HIV-positive people who have gay sex. If President Yoweri Museveni signs it—and he has said that he will—Uganda will have some of the harshest anti-gay laws in Africa. The country passed a similarly draconian bill in 2014 that was later struck down in court, but not before some Western donors froze aid payments.

Protests continued in France over President Emmanuel Macron’s decision to push through controversial pension reforms without parliamentary approval; 287 people were arrested. Despite only narrowly surviving two no-confidence votes on Monday, Mr Macron reportedly told ministers that he will not dissolve parliament nor hold a referendum on pension reform. Mr Macron’s popularity rating has fallen to just 28%, its lowest point since 2019.

Peter Obi, a defeated third-party candidate in Nigeria’s presidential election last month, filed a court petition challenging the flawed vote. Pollsters had put Mr Obi well ahead in the race, but he was ultimately defeated by Bola Tinubu, the candidate for Nigeria’s incumbent ruling party. Legal challenges of this kind are common in Nigeria, but the country’s Supreme Court has never overturned an election.

Fact of the day: 2,500, the number of American troops that remain in Iraq today. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Fed’s choice between stability and inflation
Stormy financial conditions pose a dilemma for the Federal Reserve, which will decide on Wednesday whether to raise interest rates. Before the turmoil that started with a run on Silicon Valley Bank earlier this month, a ninth straight rise seemed a foregone conclusion. Some Fed watchers had called for a jumbo increase amid signs of worryingly persistent inflation. But now there is uncertainty about whether it will raise rates at all.

High rates have been at the root of the financial chaos, so raising them again would risk further undermining troubled banks. Moreover, instability is itself a drag on the economy, meaning the Fed may have less distance to go to slow inflation. Set against these arguments is the extraordinary lending support that the Fed has already provided to stabilise banks. That could give it space to continue its fight against inflation, confident that the worst of the panic has passed.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Tencent bounces back
Earlier this month Pony Ma, the founder of Tencent, a Chinese gaming and social-media behemoth, was left off a list of delegates attending the country’s big annual political meeting. His exclusion, after serving two five-year terms in the National People’s Congress, was yet another sign that tech bosses in China have lost clout, following a two-year crackdown on the internet industry.

Investors may not be too bothered. Tencent’s share price has surged since October last year. After a long wait, several of its video games have been approved by Chinese regulators. Greater consumer spending has increased the use of the company’s payments tools. All this should be reflected in its latest earnings report for the last quarter of 2022, which is released on Wednesday. After two quarters of year-on-year decline, analysts expect revenues to grow slightly. Forecasts for 2023 are even more optimistic. For Mr Ma that will go some way in making up for any political snub.



PHOTO: ALAMY
Sweden’s NATO vote
On Wednesday Sweden’s parliament, the Riksdag, will vote on the country’s application to join NATO. The bill will pass: every major party supports it. But President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, which as a NATO member can veto accession, is blocking the Swedes (though he no longer objects to Finland, which is also trying to join the alliance). Mr Erdogan wants Sweden to deport over 100 people he calls “terrorists”, mainly Kurds who he claims back a separatist movement. And he thinks the country should forbid burning the Koran, as a far-right Danish MP did in Stockholm, Sweden’s capital, in January.

Mr Erdogan faces an election on May 14th—some experts think Turkey’s grandstanding will stop afterwards (regardless of who wins). In Sweden, support for joining NATO is strong. But most Swedes oppose restricting freedom of expression at Mr Erdogan’s request. Some grumble that joining NATO is not worth bending over backwards to please him, and feel abandoned by Finland going ahead without them.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Boris Johnson faces the music
It will be the British equivalent of an impeachment hearing. On Wednesday Boris Johnson, the former prime minister, will appear before the Privileges Committee of the House of Commons to answer the charge that he lied to Parliament. The high crimes and misdemeanours in question are a series of boozy parties that took place in Downing Street during covid-19 lockdowns. Mr Johnson admits the parties happened, and that when he told lawmakers no rules were broken, he was wrong. But he insists he did not “intentionally or recklessly mislead” the Commons because it was what he “honestly knew and believed at the time”, according to written evidence.

If Mr Johnson is found guilty, he could be suspended from Parliament—that might trigger a by-election, ejecting him from the Commons. It would be a fittingly dramatic end to one of the most turbulent and unpredictable parliamentary careers in British history.


PHOTO: AP
The UN’s water conference
On Wednesday the United Nations will hold a conference dedicated to water, sanitation and hygiene, a sector known as WASH. It is the UN’s first such event in decades. Over three days delegates in New York will discuss the organisation’s latest Water Development Report. The findings will be troubling.

Water is “dealbreaking” for the UN’s efforts to meet its Sustainable Development Goals, a set of targets for global progress. One of these seeks to ensure access to safe, sustainable and reliable drinking water for all by 2030. But progress is slow. In 2020, 26% of the global population, or 2bn people, had no such provision.

Investment in water pays huge dividends: improving supplies allows women and girls, for instance, to spend less time collecting water and more time working or in education. The conference’s promise of “bold action” would be welcome.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Wednesday: What chocolate cake, with a cherry filling, shares its name with an area of Germany?

Tuesday: Which Mexican revolutionary general became governor of Chihuahua but was assassinated in 1923?

The hallmark of the artist is simplicity.

Larry Evans
