The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated less than 1 hour ago (03:53 GMT+1 / 10:53 Hong Kong)

Federal Reserve officials unanimously agreed to raise interest rates by 0.75 percentage points for the second month running in an attempt to tamp down rampant inflation. The move lifts the Fed’s benchmark rate to between 2.25% and 2.5%. Central bankers are raising rates at the fastest pace since the 1980s. Jerome Powell, the Fed’s chairman, said he doesn’t believe America is already in a recession, but that the path to avoiding one has narrowed.

Joe Manchin, a conservative Democratic senator for West Virginia, said he had reached a deal with Chuck Schumer, the Senate’s top Democrat, on a spending bill that includes energy and tax provisions. Mr Manchin had previously torpedoed several iterations of President Joe Biden’s Build Back Better legislation, in which clean-energy incentives played a key role. “Build Back Better is dead,” Mr Manchin said in a statement, while championing the new agreement.

Ukraine attacked the Russian-occupied city of Kherson as part of a renewed offensive to retake the city, which fell to Russia in March. Using American-supplied rockets known as HIMARS, Ukraine heavily shelled a bridge used by Russians as a key supply route. In response, Russian authorities said the bridge had been closed to civilians but remained standing.

A joint co-ordination centre for Ukraine’s grain exports opened in Istanbul, Turkey. The centre is part of a deal signed by Russia and Ukraine last week to let Ukraine resume exporting grain by sea, easing a global food crisis. It is staffed by representatives from Russian, Ukraine, Turkey and the UN. Shipments are expected to begin within the next few days, despite recent Russian attacks on the port of Odessa in Ukraine.

The Federal Trade Commission, America’s competition regulator, filed a complaint to stop Meta, Facebook’s parent company, from taking over a virtual-reality firm. A top FTC official accused Meta of trying to “buy its way to the top”. It is the first antitrust lawsuit that the FTC has filed against a tech giant since Lina Khan, a critic of the companies, took over the agency in 2021.

A European Union ban on Russia Today, a state-controlled media outlet, was upheld by the bloc’s second-highest court, prompting Russia to threaten retaliation against Western media. The ban blocks EU operators from broadcasting RT content, on the grounds that its website and TV channel spread disinformation.

British scientist James Lovelock, best known for his “Gaia hypothesis” that the Earth is a complex, self-regulating system, died aged 103. Mr Lovelock also invented a device to detect CFCs in the atmosphere, work that led to a ban on the ozone-layer-destroying chemicals.

Fact of the day: $2,000, the cost of inscribing your name on a grenade to be dropped on Russian forces. Read the full story.

America on the brink of recession

PHOTO: REUTERS
When America reports its latest GDP data on Thursday, all eyes will be on whether the economy contracted for a second straight quarter—the popular definition of a recession. On balance, it may avoid that: despite shrinking in the first quarter of 2022, it is expected to have eked out an expansion in the second quarter.

Still, the White House has pre-emptively argued that a mild contraction would not equal a recession. It is technically correct. The official determination of whether America is in recession is made by the National Bureau for Economic Research, which places much weight on the jobs market. America’s current unemployment rate of 3.6%, one of the lowest levels in seventy years, is not consistent with any notion of a downturn. But what matters most for voters is their perception of growth. And that does not look good: consumer sentiment has plunged. Many believe the economy is in bad shape, regardless of the data.


MBS in Paris

PHOTO: ALAMY
Fresh from his official visit to Greece, Muhammad bin Salman, the Saudi crown prince and de facto ruler, heads to Paris on Thursday. He will be treated to dinner at the Elysée Palace by the French president, Emmanuel Macron.

Prince Muhammad has been wooing Western leaders in an effort to cast off his reputation as an autocratic butcher and to promote tourism to Saudi Arabia. This is his first visit to Europe since the murder of Jamal Khashoggi, a Saudi journalist, in Turkey in 2018. The trip comes only two weeks after President Joe Biden ditched his previous pledge to treat the kingdom as a pariah state by making his own visit there.

The crown prince’s outreach has been helped by Russia’s war in Ukraine. Europe is struggling with a squeeze on supplies of Russian gas, and needs alternatives. To this end, Mr Macron recently agreed a diesel deal with Muhammad bin Zayed, president of the United Arab Emirates. With Prince Muhammad in Paris, though, human-rights activists will be dismayed as realpolitik prevails.

Ukraine celebrates its statehood

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On Thursday Ukraine marks a national day of “statehood”, a holiday announced in happier times last summer by Volodymyr Zelensky, the president. When Russia invaded in February, the very idea of Ukrainian statehood seemed in doubt. But after Ukraine’s army saw off the Russians from Kyiv, that is no longer the case.

Indeed, there is reason for cautious optimism. Russian forces remain on the offensive in Donetsk, a province in eastern Ukraine, attacking along the Siversk-Bakhmut line, a north-south axis that protects the cities of Kramatorsk and Slovyansk. But they have made “virtually no progress over the past three weeks”, according to Rochan Consulting, a firm tracking the war. Ukraine has also stepped up its counter-attacks in Kherson province, in the south, blowing up bridges to cut off Russian forces west of the Dnieper river. It is unclear whether this marks the start of a long-awaited full Ukrainian counter-offensive in the province. But either way, it imposes an unpleasant dilemma on Russia: shore up the lines in Kherson, or keep feeding soldiers into the Donetsk meat-grinder?

Mixed results for Big Tech

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Tech stocks have tumbled precipitously over the past year. The Nasdaq-100 index is down by around 25% since January. Investors have therefore paid keen attention to the earnings reports of all five of America’s tech giants this week.

On Tuesday Alphabet, Google’s parent company, announced second-quarter revenue of $69.7bn, up 13% year-on-year. That was lower than expected, but investors did not mind: they had feared a meltdown in the online-ad industry after Snap and Twitter posted poor results last week. Meta, which reports on Wednesday, will be another bellwether for online ads.

Things look similarly rosy in the cloud-computing and enterprise markets. Though Microsoft’s revenue, reported on Tuesday, was a fraction worse than expectations, bosses said they expected “double-digit” revenue growth for this fiscal year. That bodes well for Amazon, the cloud market leader, which publishes earnings on Thursday. But the outlook for Apple, which also reports on Thursday, is less bright: the company may find that rising inflation tempers demand for its expensive gadgets.

The Commonwealth Games struggle for relevance

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Commonwealth Games, which begin in Birmingham on Thursday, are sometimes referred to as “the friendly games”. But congeniality counts for little in sport.

The competition is struggling for relevance, thanks to a host of other, more exciting rivals. (Athletics wrapped up its World Championships on July 24th.) The Commonwealth Games are also expensive. Britain’s government stepped in at a cost of £778m ($940m) after Durban, in South Africa, which was to have been the first African host, was stripped of its hosting duties in 2017 amid financial problems. And then there is the Commonwealth itself, a legacy of the British empire that some see as a colonial relic.

The games’ organisers promise a sweep of changes. The next competition, in 2026, will take place not in one city, but across the Australian state of Victoria. They may also allow hosts to propose new sports that have local relevance. Canada, for instance, which wants to host the centenary event in 2030, could add lacrosse. But if these efforts fail, the games risk becoming one of sport’s also-rans.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which animated characters are the “rescue rangers” who are the focus of a new Disney film?

Wednesday: In what location did Eva Braun get married in April 1945?

The shorter and the plainer the better.

Beatrix Potter
