The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 2 hours ago (23:07 GMT+1 / 06:07 Hong Kong)

Liz Truss, Britain’s new prime minister, appointed Kwasi Kwarteng as chancellor of the exchequer, or finance minister. The son of Ghanian immigrants, Mr Kwarteng—hitherto the business secretary—supports cutting taxes and business regulations, and has encouraged “fiscal loosening” to help households weather rising energy prices. On Thursday Ms Truss is due to unveil a proposal to freeze average annual energy bills, which may otherwise jump by 80% in October, at about £2,500 ($2,880). The subsidies could cost up to £100bn, and are expected to be paid for by borrowing.

America said Russia was trying to buy millions of rockets and artillery shells from North Korea for use in Ukraine. The appeal to North Korea “does demonstrate and is indicative of the situation that Russia finds itself in”, said the Pentagon’s spokesman, referring to the impact of sanctions and export controls. He added that there were no details yet about whether payments or shipments had been made.

Juul Labs agreed in principle to pay $438.5m to 33 American states and Puerto Rico to settle allegations that it marketed its vaping products to teenagers. The e-cigarette startup, the states claimed, actively courted youth consumers although its wares were “both illegal for them to purchase and are unhealthy…to use”. Lawsuits brought against Juul by nine other states continue, as do thousands from individual plaintiffs.

The UN’s nuclear watchdog called for the “immediate establishment” of a safety zone around the Zaporizhia nuclear station. The plant, in Russian-held territory in southern Ukraine, has been the site of shelling for months. Last week 14 UN inspectors visited the power station; two have stayed on.

China’s central bank set the reference rate for the yuan at its weakest level in two years, at 6.91 to the buoyant dollar. China’s currency has suddenly weakened this year after lockdowns hampered exports. The central bank also reduced the amount of foreign currency that Chinese banks need to hold, another sign of its desire to prop up the sliding yuan.

Energy prices in California surged to their highest levels in two years, as residents turned up their air conditioners in the midst of a heatwave in the American West. The state’s Independent System Operator, which oversees the electricity supply, urged Californians to conserve energy as surges in demand increases the risk of outages.

Protests across Indonesia’s biggest cities broke out against government plans to increase subsidised fuel prices for the first time in eight years. On Saturday Joko Widodo, Indonesia’s president, said that inflation had necessitated a price increase of about 30%.

Fact of the day: €65bn, the minimum cost of Germany’s energy-bill relief package, equivalent to 1.8% of the country’s GDP. Read the full story.

Bolsonaristas rally in Brazil

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As well as the usual military parades, a fleet of tractors will lumber through Brazil’s capital, Brasília, on independence day on Wednesday. Farmers are just one group to show support for the country’s president, Jair Bolsonaro, ahead of a heavily-contested election on October 2nd. Supporters of the right-wing populist will take to the streets in other big cities too. In Rio, Mr Bolsonaro will meet fans on Copacabana Beach.

The rallies are meant to drum up support for a president who is trailing in the polls. But Bolsonaristas mistrust the surveys. They echo their leader’s unsupported claims that the country’s electronic voting system could easily be hacked. They accuse the electoral court of bias in favour of his rival, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a leftist former president. Mr Bolsonaro has fanned these sentiments, calling on supporters to defend “transparency” and “liberty”. In turn, they have suggested that the president “call in the armed forces” and “clean out the Supreme Court”. If political tensions boil over, the parades could descend into violence.

Another year, another iPhone

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
As has become the custom at Apple’s annual summits in Silicon Valley, on Wednesday the world’s biggest tech firm will show off a revamped iPhone. Don’t expect anything revolutionary. The newest versions of Apple’s flagship will mainly have faster chips, better cameras and bigger screens. They will probably be more expensive: the top-of-the-line ‌iPhone 14 Pro‌ Max, for instance, is expected to start at $1,199—$100 more than its predecessor.

The event, which is the first in-person gathering since 2019, will probably also bring new AirPods, iPads and Apple Watches. But Apple is still mainly an iPhone company. The device accounted for nearly half of the firm’s sales of $83bn between April and June. Its smartphones now have more users in America than those with Android, Google’s operating system, according to Counterpoint, a research firm. But Apple’s next act is already scheduled for next year, when it is likely to release its much-anticipated mixed-reality headset.


Japan’s phantom reopening

PHOTO: AFLO
Tourists hoping to catch the tail end of summer in Japan will be disappointed. On Wednesday the country will ease travel rules—but only a bit. Tourists will still be required to obtain visas and to book their travel through a certified agency. The one concession is that the tours no longer have to be guided. Citizens, permanent residents and business visitors will gain more, with fully vaccinated travellers relieved of the need to take a pre-departure PCR test. The daily cap on arrivals will rise from 20,000 to 50,000.

Japan has been hyper-cautious about reopening after the pandemic. That has left it lagging behind its peers in the G7 and neighbours in Asia, many of which have started welcoming tourists more readily. Yet the closed-door policies have been overwhelmingly popular with Japanese voters. With his approval ratings sliding, Kishida Fumio, Japan’s prime minister, is unlikely to take a risk on opening up more anytime soon.

Reality catches up with meme stocks

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The GameStop hype became a parable for America’s frenzied stockmarket. The American video-game retailer made headlines last January when an investor stampede pushed its share price up roughly 20-fold in three weeks. The rally was egged on by amateur investors on social media seeking to squeeze professional short-sellers who had bet against the company. GameStop’s sudden share-price volatility, exacerbated by online attention, made it the archetypal “meme stock”.

On Wednesday the unlikely stockmarket star will deliver its quarterly earnings report. GameStop is still priced at over five times its value at the start of last year, despite lacklustre performance. The bricks-and-mortar business is trying to move online, but struggling to compete with behemoths like Amazon. The company also missed the boat on the crypto craze with ill-timed launches of an NFT marketplace and a digital wallet. Investors in meme stocks are guided more by hype than fundamentals, but reality always catches up eventually.

As safe as houses?

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Like most central banks, the Bank of Canada is quickly raising borrowing costs. It is shaping up for another jump on Wednesday, from 2.5% to 3.25%. Inflation has come off its recent peaks but is still near 8%, pushed up by unsustainable wage growth and still-high expectations of future inflation.

But even more so than other rich countries, Canada faces acute risks from higher borrowing costs. In recent years there has been an unprecedented housing boom. Prices are more than 300% higher, in real terms, than in 2000. Higher interest rates will drive up mortgage costs, making homes less affordable and letting some of the air out of the bubbly property market. But household debt is worryingly high, at 185% of disposable income. Given that backdrop, falling house prices could deal a big blow to consumer confidence and weigh on spending more generally.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: What term is used to describe a gambling strategy where the stakes are doubled till a win is achieved?


Wednesday: What is the alternative name for the stapes, a bone in the middle ear?

Brass shines as fair to the ignorant as gold to the goldsmiths.

Queen Elizabeth I
