The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 3 hours ago (00:35 GMT / 08:35 Hong Kong)

NATO’s secretary-general, Jens Stoltenberg, said that it is “likely” that a missile that hit a farm in Poland was fired by Ukraine’s air-defence force. He added that it was “not Ukraine’s fault”, since the country was defending itself against Russian missile attacks. At a press conference after an emergency NATO meeting Mr Stoltenberg said that the alliance's “top priority” is providing air defences to Ukraine.

The Republican Party narrowly regained control of America’s House of Representatives. Eight days after the midterm elections, the party clinched its 218th seat, to the Democrats’ 210. Even if Republicans prevail in the seven outstanding races, their margin is far slimmer than they had hoped for—and the worst midterm performance by a party out of power in 20 years. Nevertheless, it will allow them to stall much of President Joe Biden’s agenda.

Mitch McConell was re-elected leader of the Republican party in America’s Senate, winning 37-10 against Rick Scott, who was backed by Donald Trump and other right-wingers. The challenge was the first that Mr McConnell, who has led his party in the Senate since 2007, has faced, and marks the latest instance of Republican infighting. Last night, Mr Trump announced that he would run for the presidency in 2024, defying some of his party’s senior advisers.

Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Brazil’s incoming president, was greeted enthusiastically at COP27, the UN climate summit in Egypt. Lula told delegates that “Brazil is back” and promised to fight deforestation in the Amazon rainforest. Germany and Norway have signalled that they are willing to help revive the “Amazon Fund”, a coalition working to protect the area.

Britain’s annual inflation rate reached 11.1% in October, up from 10.1% in September and a 41-year high. The cost of food and non-alcoholic drink, for instance, rose by 16.2%. Britain’s chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, is expected to raise taxes in his Autumn budget on Thursday. Meanwhile, Dominic Raab, Britain’s deputy prime minister, requested an independent investigation into accusations of bullying made against him.

Some 15 trucks loaded with food entered the Ethiopian region of Tigray, the first such deliveries since the Ethiopian government and Tigrayan rebels made peace on November 2nd. As part of the pact that froze a two-year-long civil war, Ethiopia’s government agreed to allow aid to enter Tigray unhindered. Some 6m people live in the region, many of whom are on the brink of starvation.

Elon Musk said he would reduce his time at Twitter and eventually install a new boss at the social network. Shares in Tesla, Mr Musk’s electric-vehicle firm, slipped recently amid investors’ unease over the time that the billionaire is devoting to Twitter, which he acquired for $44bn last month. Earlier, Mr Musk sent an ultimatum to Twitter’s employees: commit to a new “hardcore” working environment or leave the company.

Fact of the day: 1.6bn, the number of international tourist trips forecast to take place in 2023, still 300m fewer than in 2019. Read the full story.

Indonesia’s economy is ready to boom

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Like much of the world, Indonesia is battling inflation. In October prices rose by 5.7% year on year, well above the Bank Indonesia’s target of 2-4%. So on Thursday policymakers are expected to increase interest rates for the fourth consecutive month, by half a percentage point to 5.25%. Indonesia’s economic prospects, however, are bright.

The economy grew at an annual rate of 5.7% in real terms in the quarter ending in September, the fastest pace in over a year. Foreign investment has poured into the country’s metals-processing sector, which draws on abundant deposits of nickel and other metals. Exports are booming as demand for other natural resources, such as palm oil, has risen.

Joko Widodo, Indonesia’s president, has managed the economy well, keeping government debt low and reintroducing a deficit cap. But that also presents a challenge. Jokowi, as he is known, must step down at the end of his second term, in 2024. His successor may not guide the economy as well as he has.

Britain’s autumn budget

PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
On Thursday Britain’s latest chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, will deliver his first autumn statement. Designed to reassure investors, its contents will make voters squeal.

The backdrop is Britain’s deteriorating economic outlook, rising interest rates and a sharp increase in the bill to service the government’s debt. To achieve forecasts that by 2027-28 the debt-to-GDP ratio will be falling, the government is expected to announce spending cuts and tax rises worth nearly £55bn ($65.4bn) annually, or around 2.5% of GDP

Much of the total will come from squeezing spending on public services. That is unwelcome news for those already concerned about cracks in health services and elsewhere. Current budgets are being eaten away by rising costs. Strikes over wages are looming, too. Household finances are already stretched. Two months ago Mr Hunt’s predecessor recklessly promised tax cuts. Now tax increases are on the cards, though they may only happen slowly as thresholds are frozen. Mr Hunt will argue that his fiscal medicine is necessary. But it will not go down easily.


Burberry’s buoyant six months

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Though high-street clothing retailers have struggled in 2022, it has been a good year to tailor the rich. With their customers less at the mercy of inflation, many luxury fashion brands have enjoyed bumper profits. Expectations are thus high on Thursday as Burberry, a classic British brand, reports earnings for the first half of the year.

Burberry will probably return to pre-pandemic levels of profitability. The chief executive, Jonathan Akeroyd, will also unveil his plan to compete with European rivals. Mr Akeroyd has emphasised the brand’s Britishness—and replaced former creative director Riccardo Tisci, an Italian, with Daniel Lee, a Yorkshireman.

The brand’s future, however, lies closer to Beijing than Bradford. Burberry made £1.3bn ($1.6bn) last year from Asia, almost half its total. But sales in China, its biggest Asian market, have been hurt by the country’s zero-covid policy. Some analysts predict that China’s luxury market will recover in 2023; Mr Akeroyd will be hoping they are right.

A new leader for America’s Catholics

PHOTO: AP
On Thursday American bishops meet in Baltimore as the plenary assembly of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops wraps up. A day earlier the bishops elected Timothy Broglio, the archbishop for the armed forces, as their national president. He will be an important voice for the church, notably in the battle over abortion in America.

Archbishop Broglio was not the most ardent pro-life campaigner on the ballot. But the bishops’ hard line on abortion is unlikely to change under his leadership. He supported a religious exemption for covid-19 vaccines, on the grounds that some jabs were developed using cells derived from aborted foetal tissue. His new deputy, Archbishop William Lori, has chaired the conference’s committee on pro-life activities.

The conference is out of step with many American Catholics. According to Pew Research Centre, a think-tank, more than half believe abortion should be legal in all or most cases.

The Latin Grammy Awards

PHOTO: REUTERS
It has been a bumper year for Latin music. In March Anitta became the first Brazilian singer to top Spotify’s global song chart. Bad Bunny, a Puerto Rican who was the most-streamed artist on Spotify in 2020 and 2021, has smashed records again in 2022. When his album “Un Verano Sin Ti” (“A Summer Without You”) was released on May 6th, Bad Bunny became the most-streamed artist on a single day ever.

On Thursday, at the Latin Grammy Awards in Las Vegas, the acts will probably win industry plaudits, too. Bad Bunny leads with ten nominations; Anitta’s hit single “Envolver” (“Involved”) is up for record of the year. Others with a good chance of success include Camilo, a Colombian singer-songwriter; and Edgar Barrera, a Mexican musician. Latin music is also gaining more recognition at international awards shows: “Un Verano” is shortlisted for album of the year at America’s Grammys in February 2023, a first for a Spanish-language record.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Thursday: Which rock group produced the international hit “Chasing Cars”?

Wednesday: Which American retail chain was founded in 1923 by a Mr Pressman?

Tyranny cannot defeat the power of ideas.

Helen Keller