The world in brief May 30, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 05:15 GMT+1 London

Sergei Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, said that “liberating” the Donbas region of Ukraine was his country’s “unconditional” priority. Mr Lavrov spoke as Russia’s fierce assault on Severodonetsk continued. It is the most important city in the Luhansk oblast the Russians have yet to occupy. Meanwhile Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, visited Kharkiv and met troops on the frontline nearby. He sacked the city’s security chief for having failed to defend it when the invasion began. It was Mr Zelensky’s first appearance outside the capital, Kyiv, since then.

America’s Department of Justice said that it would review the police’s response to the mass shooting at a school in Uvalde, Texas, last Tuesday, in which 19 children and two teachers were murdered. Officers reportedly waited for 50 minutes before stopping the killer. On Sunday President Joe Biden visited the town, where he met victims’ families.

Germany’s economy minister, Robert Habeck, warned that EU unity on sanctions meant to punish Russia for invading Ukraine was starting to “crumble” ahead of a meeting of its leaders on Monday. On Saturday the European Commission proposed delaying restrictions on imports of Russian oil through a key pipeline in an attempt to appease the government of Hungary, which has been holding up a deal. Meanwhile Serbia, which has refused to explicitly condemn the invasion, announced it had secured an “extremely favourable” gas supply deal with Russia.

Colombia held the first round of a presidential election. A plurality plumped for Gustavo Petro, a former guerrilla who hopes to become Colombia’s first-ever leftist president. In the run-off to be held on June 19th, Mr Petro will face Rodolfo Hernández, a populist former mayor. Federico “Fico” Gutiérrez, representing a coalition of right-wing parties, was bumped out of the running.

Stores, offices and some public transport reopened in Beijing on Sunday, after officials announced they had brought the covid-19 outbreak in China’s capital under control. Likewise in Shanghai—where cases are at their lowest level since mid-March—authorities said they will loosen the testing requirements needed to enter public places, starting Wednesday.

Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, said talks with diplomats from Finland and Sweden had not persuaded him to drop his veto over the countries' joining NATO. Mr Erdogan accuses the countries of harbouring members of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, which Turkey considers a terrorist organisation, and followers of Fethullah Gulen, whom he accuses of fomenting a failed coup in 2016.

The World Health Organisation judged that monkeypox poses a “moderate risk” to public health globally. But the risk would increase were the virus to “establish itself as a human pathogen”. So far 257 confirmed cases have been reported in 23 countries where the disease is typically not found. The WHO expects those figures to rise as surveillance increases. No fatalities have been reported so far.

Fact of the Day: 15m rupiah ($1,000), the value of prizes won in singing competitions by one magpie in the Indonesian capital, Jakarta. 

The Stormont storm blows on
The Northern Ireland assembly meets in Stormont, home of the devolved administration, on Monday for the first time since elections earlier in May. The “recall” was brought after a petition by Sinn Féin, a party which advocates a united Ireland and came top in those polls. The meeting is intended to elect a speaker and deputy speakers and to appoint a first minister and deputy first minister. But few expect much of a breakthrough.

The largest unionist party, the Democratic Unionist Party, has blocked appointments to the new government. That is part of its protest against the Northern Ireland protocol, the bit of the United Kingdom’s Brexit deal with the EU that in effect drew a trade border in the Irish Sea. The DUP’s leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, has called the recall a “stunt”. Failure to reach a deal would be nothing new. In the 22 years of devolved government, its work has been suspended for more than a third of that time.


More Russian headaches for the EU
Leaders of the EU’s 27 member-states will meet in Brussels on Monday, for the fourth time since war broke out on the bloc’s doorstep. The fallout from events in Ukraine will once again dominate proceedings.

Momentum for a sixth package of sanctions against Russia has stalled. Its central component, an embargo on Russian oil, is unacceptable to Hungary, which wants the EU to pay for the upgrade to its energy infrastructure before agreeing. On Saturday the European Commission proposed delaying restrictions on imports of Russian oil through a key pipeline supplying the country.

EU leaders will also take stock on how to best assist Ukraine militarily. Concerns over food security prompted by Russia’s blockade of Ukrainian ports will also feature. Europe knows instability linked to higher grain prices will hit countries in Africa and the Middle East, from where large flows of migrants into the bloc have morphed into political headaches in the past.

The battle for influence in the Pacific
In the second world war, America thwarted Japan’s advance by leapfrogging across the Pacific islands. Now China has embarked on a diplomatic island-hopping campaign to secure a foothold in the region. America hopes to slow it down.

China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, is on an eight-nation Pacific tour. Since Thursday, Mr Wang has signed economic deals in Kiribati and Samoa. In Fiji on Monday he is expected to unveil a pact covering fishery, security and other areas with ten Pacific nations.

China hopes to build on the signing in April of a security pact with the Solomon Islands, which America fears could lead to a naval base being built there. America and its allies have been spurred into action. Australia’s new foreign minister, Penny Wong, rushed to Fiji last week to pledge “no-strings” support in areas including defence and climate change. Fiji has also been enticed to join America’s trade initiative, the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework.

Making cousinly marriages safer
More than half of weddings in Qatar and Saudi Arabia are between people who are related. In the United Arab Emirates the share is nearly as high. That keeps kinship webs tight and property within the family. But consanguinity causes a range of inherited disorders. And even when Qataris or Emiratis marry outside their families, the pool of potential partners is small. Now Qatar is developing a way to reduce the risks.

The Qatar Genome Programme has sequenced the genomes of nearly one in ten Qataris. Better genomics may one day help doctors offer premarital genetic testing. Sequencing Arab genomes will enrich the world’s data too. Since the Human Genome Project first fully mapped human DNA in 2003, scientists have sequenced the blueprints of around 1m people worldwide. But far less than 1% of those are of Middle Easterners, though they make up around 5% of the world’s population. Adding a consanguineous population too has been described by one geneticist as an “actual human experiment”.

Mythologising punk
The legend that punk was a revolution masterminded by Malcolm McLaren, the manager of the Sex Pistols, has endured for decades. It is repeated in “Pistol”, a six-part miniseries scripted by Craig Pearce (who co-wrote films with Baz Luhrmann) and directed by Danny Boyle (“Trainspotting”, “28 Days Later”), which is released on Hulu on Tuesday.

Based on a memoir by Steve Jones, the Sex Pistols’ guitarist, who was with the British band from its inauspicious infancy to its ignominious end, “Pistol” depicts punk as a deliberate cultural mission guided by McLaren, rather than a mini-insurrection that failed to remake Britain. But reality is messy, and punk messier still. McLaren was a brilliant provocateur, but also a serial fabulist who claimed after the fact to have orchestrated events he could neither foresee nor control. This is punk as historical costume drama, with characters who speak in aphorisms. And the trouble with historical costume dramas is their tendency to render events as predestined.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Monday: Which Welsh footballer was transferred to Real Madrid for a world-record fee in 2013?
