The world in brief
August 14, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

The death toll from wildfires in Hawaii rose to at least 89, in the deadliest natural disaster since the archipelago became an American state in 1959. The fires are also the deadliest in America in more than 100 years. Josh Green, Hawaii’s governor, warned that the number of deaths would continue to rise. Around 1,000 buildings have been destroyed, leaving thousands homeless. A year-long drought and high winds combined to help the fires spread with ferocious speed.

China’s foreign ministry condemned the visit of Taiwan’s vice-president, William Lai Ching-te, to America. China, which objects to official recognition for the government in Taipei, said Mr Lai was a separatist and that it would take steps to defend its sovereignty. Mr Lai, the ruling-party candidate in next year’s presidential election, stopped over in New York before a trip to Paraguay.

Two witnesses have been told to testify before a grand jury in Atlanta on Tuesday, regarding Donald Trump’s alleged attempts to illegally overturn election results. Fani Willis, Fulton County’s District Attorney, has already indicated she would seek charges by the end of next week. If Mr Trump is indicted in Georgia, it would be his fourth indictment in five months.

Russia said it had fired warning shots at a merchant vessel in the Black Sea to make it halt for inspection. Since Russia left the Black Sea grain deal in July it has claimed the right to interdict any ship heading towards Ukraine suspected of carrying weapons. The Sukru Okan was boarded, inspected and allowed to pass. The event will further worry shipowners (and insurers) in the vital sea lane.

China’s government issued new regulations to encourage more foreign investment in the country. The 24 rules included tax incentives and a strengthening of enforcement procedures to protect intellectual-property rights. The changes come as China struggles to perk up its sluggish economy, still recovering from covid-pandemic lockdowns.

The running-mate of Fernando Villavicencio, assassinated on Wednesday, will contest Ecuador’s forthcoming presidential election in his stead. Andrea Gonzalez was chosen by their party, Construye; she has mainly campaigned on environmental issues. Mr Villavicencio was a journalist and anti-corruption activist. The party said that Ms Gonzalez would guarantee his “legacy”.

Elon Musk, the owner of X (formerly Twitter) and Mark Zuckerberg, co-founder of Meta, have been sparring online for months. Soon the billionaires may take their fight offline: Mr Musk said that Italy has agreed to host a long-mooted charity cage fight between the pair. He promised an “epic location”—but Italy’s culture ministry ruled out the Colosseum, which is undergoing repairs.

Correction: In early editions of the weekend’s News In Brief we misattributed the “zinger” quote to the entirely fictitious William Black. We meant, of course, William Blake. Sorry.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
India battles rising food prices
To taste the effects of inflation in India, visit a fast-food restaurant. Last week the American chain Subway announced that it would no longer add a free cheese slice to its sandwiches because of rising costs. Similarly, many McDonald’s outlets have done away with tomatoes in their burgers. Food prices have risen because of erratic monsoons, which have submerged crops in parts of the country.

As a result, inflation has surged. Data released on Monday will probably reveal that the annual inflation rate accelerated to 6.4% in July, from 4.8% in June. That would exceed the central bank’s upper threshold of 6%. Last week the bank left interest rates unchanged for a third consecutive meeting since April, but sustained food inflation may force it back into action. The government has already acted, restricting exports of rice to slow rising domestic prices. With a general election scheduled next year, the government knows Indian voters won’t stomach rising costs.



PHOTO: ALAMY
The Muslim Brotherhood’s identity crisis
When Muhammad Morsi, Egypt’s first democratically elected president and a member of the Muslim Brotherhood, was ousted in a coup, his followers protested in Rabaa Square, in Cairo. On August 14th 2013, Egyptian security forces killed at least 900 members of the Brotherhood gathered there. Ten years later the group has barely recovered.

Many of those who survived the massacre were thrown into prison; others fled into exile. In 2020 Mahmoud Ezzat, the Brotherhood’s then leader, was arrested. The succession dispute that followed was unusually messy.

But the Brotherhood elected a new acting “general guide”, or leader, 78-year-old Salah Abudlhaq, in March of this year. Mr Abulhaq’s arrival could signal a new start. He has been far removed from the recent internal squabbles. Nonetheless, he will have his work cut out. The government has not yet loosened its hold on the Brotherhood. The anniversary on Monday will probably pass relatively quietly. Members fear that any protests would be aggressively dispersed—again.


PHOTO: EPA
Just for one day: Zimbabwe’s Heroes’ Day
Monday will be no ordinary Heroes’ Day in Zimbabwe. The day is supposed to commemorate the thousands of people who lost their lives in the “liberation war” of the 1960s and ’70s that led to the end of white-run Rhodesia and the establishment of Zimbabwe in 1980 under the rule of Robert Mugabe. But with a general election due on August 23rd Zanu-PF, the party that has misruled the country since independence, will use the moment for political rallies.

It will argue, falsely, that it alone liberated the country and insist that only Emmerson Mnangagwa, Mugabe’s successor, can keep the revolution alive. Many—almost certainly most—Zimbabweans are beyond tired of this hogwash. Decades of corruption, idiotic policies and thuggery mean that real GDP per capita is lower today than in 1980. But Zanu-PF has a history of rigging elections. There are ample reasons to believe it will try to do so again.


PHOTO: ALAMY
Alabama’s political map goes back to court
In June the Supreme Court ordered Alabama to re-draw its electoral map. In 2021 the state’s legislature created one with just a single majority-black district out of seven, though black Alabamans comprise 27% of the voting-age population. The Supreme Court agreed with a lower court’s decision: the map violated the Voting Rights Act.

On Monday the district court that rejected the first map will consider the legislature’s revised effort. The Supreme Court instructed lawmakers to create a second majority-black district “or something quite close”. Republicans, who have a super-majority in the legislature, are testing that formulation. Their proposed map preserves one majority-black district and increases the share of black voters in a second to just under 40%. It all but ensures that Alabama will continue to send six Republicans to the House of Representatives (black voters tend to prefer Democrats), where the GOP has a razor-thin majority. Republicans hail a “compromise”; the district court might see it differently.


PHOTO: GENERAL FILM CORPORATION
The way to rob a (central) bank
How can $101m disappear from a bank? It is a question investigators struggled to answer in 2016, when hackers stole that sum from Bangladesh’s central bank. “Billion Dollar Heist”, a documentary which comes out on Monday, explains how scammers used SWIFT, a cross-border payments network, to wire funds from the bank’s deposit with America’s Federal Reserve to accounts in Sri Lanka and the Philippines. The show’s title seemingly refers to the fact that, if not for their sloppiness, the cybercriminals could have escaped with $1bn.

The story is well suited to the screen. It features shadowy baddies, obscure online worlds and transnational criminal operations. Audiences were hooked by “The Lazarus Heist”, a podcast and subsequent book about state-sponsored hackers in North Korea (the same group was probably behind the Bangladesh scam). And our sister magazine, 1843, recently reported on the theft of $2.5bn from Iraq’s largest state bank. It seems no prize is too big for today’s bank robbers.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which British actor created the comedy “Fleabag”?

The main objective is to learn to think crudely. Crude thinking is the great one’s thinking.

Bertolt Brecht
