The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (23:22 GMT+1 / 06:22 Hong Kong)

Russia pressed on with its offensive in several areas of Ukraine, having bombarded it with unusual severity over the weekend. Russian forces pounded Nikopol, a city near Zaporizhia, and fired cruise missiles into Odessa. The EU’s chief diplomat, Josep Borrell, rejected calls from member states bordering Russia, including Estonia and Finland, for a blanket ban on tourist visas for Russians travelling to the Schengen area. He advocated a “more selective” approach ahead of talks planned for next week.

Anthony Fauci, the chief medical adviser to the American president, said he would step down from that role, and from his job as the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. The 81-year old infectious diseases expert was the face of the American government’s efforts to contain the covid-19 pandemic.

Germany’s economy is increasingly likely to slip into recession with inflation rising above 10% this autumn, according to the country’s Bundesbank. The euro zone’s largest economy is highly reliant on Russian gas supplies, which will again be choked off in a three-day closure of the Nord Stream 1 pipeline next week. Dutch TTF prices, a key benchmark for Europe’s wholesale gas price, jumped by 20% to above €290 per MWh.

Elon Musk has subpoenaed the co-founder and former CEO of Twitter, Jack Dorsey, as part of his attempt to tear up a deal in which he agreed to buy the social media network for $44bn. Mr Musk backed out of the agreement in July, accusing Twitter of misrepresenting the number of bot and spam accounts on its platform. The two sides have since sued each other over the fate of the deal; a trial is set to begin in October.

Turkey doubled its imports of Russian oil this year, according to Refinitiv, a financial-data provider. Imports rose to over 200,000 barrels per day so far in 2022, compared with 98,000 in the same period of 2021. Trade between the two countries has grown rapidly since Turkey elected not to join Western sanctions against Russia, citing its reliance on Russian energy.

Thousands of Haitians marched through the capital Port-Au-Prince demanding the resignation of prime minister Ariel Henry and an end to rising poverty and violence. Police fired tear gas to quell the protest, during which a demonstrator was killed by an unidentified gunman. Annual inflation is now 29% in the Caribbean nation and some basic food prices have more than quadrupled. Gang violence and kidnappings have also increased.

Ford said it would cut 3,000 jobs in September, mostly in America, Canada and India. The move is part of a restructuring and money-saving strategy as the car manufacturer shifts its focus to electric vehicles and batteries; its CEO, Jim Farley, said his workforce was ill-equipped to handle the transition. Ford reckons that 40% of its global sales will be electric by 2030.

Fact of the day: 2,700, the estimated number of people killed because of terrorist violence in Mali so far this year, 40% more than in all of 2021. Read the full article.

The euro zone’s autumn of discontent

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
If recent surveys are any indication, growth in the euro zone is about to start slowing. The services sector, which had bounced back from a slowdown caused by the pandemic, is flagging as the tourist season ends. A severe energy crunch has probably already sent industry into recession. Tuesday’s release of purchasing managers’ index figures, which track economic activity, will add to the gloomy mood.

A further decline would be a headache for Europe’s politicians and monetary authorities alike. Governments are already under pressure to combat soaring energy bills with price caps and cash transfers. A weaker economy could dry up tax revenues. Businesses may start asking for tax cuts or cash compensation, too. The European Central Bank knows that interest-rate increases, while necessary to contain inflation, will inflict economic pain. The autumn of discontent may begin early this year.


China’s JD.com trots forward

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The worst is over for China’s embattled tech companies. But so is the best. Their share prices have bounced back from lows in March, but remain far below their peaks in early 2021. The ferocity of the long regulatory crackdown on the sector (including fines for unfair competition and stricter policing of data) has diminished somewhat. But China’s equally relentless fight against covid-19 has also hurt business.

Alibaba and Tencent both reported a decline in their revenues last quarter, compared with a year earlier. JD.com, a third tech giant, releases its results on Tuesday. Unlike many tech companies, it owns much of its distribution network (employing over 220,000 delivery staff). That may help to shield it from supply-chain disruption and win it some political goodwill. But the company’s growth will still be bridled. As one of its executives recently put it, there will be no return to “riding the horse without holding the reins”.

Russia tries to set Syria straight

PHOTO: AP
While its war rages in Ukraine, Russia is struggling to stabilise its conflict-battered satellite in the Middle East, the Syrian regime of Bashar al-Assad. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, is meeting his Syrian counterpart, Faisal Mekdad, in Moscow on Tuesday. Syria wants assurances that Russia will not divert more forces away from Mr Assad’s civil war to the front in Ukraine. The Wagner Group, a shadowy Russian-backed private security contractor in Syria, has already scaled back its operations. Syria’s cash-poor government also desperately needs grain.

But Russia has demands, too. Turkey’s membership of NATO and location on the Black Sea makes its co-operation critical for Russia’s war in Ukraine. So Russia wants Mr Assad to make peace with his foe, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president. That would require Mr Assad to facilitate the return of Syrian refugees from Turkey and start reconciling with the Turkish-backed rebels in Syria’s north. But so far Russian efforts to push Mr Assad to accept a political settlement have come to nothing.

Will the sun shine red in Florida?

PHOTO: EYEVINE
On Tuesday Floridians will head to the polls in the state’s last major primary of the year. Turnout and voters’ choices in the Sunshine State, which has drifted towards the Republican party in recent years, will be a gauge of the Democrats’ prospects in the mid-term elections.

Watch who Democrats choose as their gubernatorial candidate to challenge Ron DeSantis, the Republican incumbent. The most likely choices are Charlie Crist, a former congressman, or Nikki Fried, the state’s commissioner of agriculture. But neither has the campaign chest nor the name recognition to beat the popular Mr DeSantis, who is among the top potential Republican presidential contenders for 2024.

Floridians will also pick the Democratic contender for the Senate. Val Demings, a former police chief in Orlando, is the only candidate who could mount a meaningful challenge to Marco Rubio, a Republican and the current senator, in November. Polls that show her leading against Mr Rubio have encouraged national Democratic donors to pile in.

The first whistle blows for Ukrainian football

PHOTO: REUTERS
When Russia invaded, football, like so much else in Ukraine, ground to a halt. Foreign professional players fled the country while many of their Ukrainian counterparts enlisted. Clubs used their infrastructure to provide humanitarian relief. But on Tuesday the ball will start rolling again. The Ukrainian Premier League, the country’s top football division, returns for a new season. Fans will not be allowed in the stadiums, which will be fitted with air-raid shelters to protect players and officials in case of Russian shelling.

The restart is a calculated risk to help small clubs struggling for revenue. But it is also a boost to the country’s morale. The opening match will be played between FC Shakhtar, a club exiled from the Russian-occupied province of Donetsk since 2014, and Metalist 1925 from Kharkiv, a city bombarded by the Russians. Shakhtar will probably win that match. But this year survival, not football, is the name of the game.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: What was the traditional nickname for IBM, based on its logo?

Monday: What is the traditional title for an adult male Mormon who has taken the lowest office in the Melchizedek priesthood?

Victory attained by violence is tantamount to a defeat, for it is momentary.

Mahatma Gandhi
