The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

March 13, 2023
Signature Bank, a New York-based lender, became the second financial institution to be shut down by American regulators after the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank on Friday. The regulators said that people will have full access to their deposits at both banks thanks to a series of measures unveiled by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department. In a joint statement they ruled out bail-outs and the use of taxpayer money to shore up deposits.

President Xi Jinping unexpectedly kept Yi Gang in his role as central bank governor, a reappointment analysts say will reassure investors worried about increasing government meddling in Chinese markets. A new array of senior officials were unveiled at the National People’s Congress, a meeting of the country’s largely ceremonial legislature. On Saturday the congress rubber-stamped Mr Xi’s choice for prime minister Li Qiang.

Dmytro Kuleba, Ukraine’s foreign minister, said that his country’s army would not retreat from Bakhmut, a town in eastern Ukraine that Russia has been trying to seize for months. On Saturday both sides claimed to have killed hundreds of enemy soldiers there. Meanwhile Russia will hold talks with the United Nations on Monday to renew a deal allowing grain exports from Ukraine.

India’s government urged the country’s Supreme Court to oppose recognising same-sex marriages, according to a legal filing seen by Reuters. It comes as the top court is expected to hear cases on the issue on Monday. Homosexuality was decriminalised in India in 2018, but activists say it is unjust that they cannot legally marry.

France’s senate voted to approve President Emmanuel Macron’s plans to reform pensions, which have faced furious nationwide protests for almost a week. The centrepiece of Mr Macron’s plan is raising the retirement age from 62 to 64. A committee will now come up with a final draft of the reform, before the senate and national assembly vote again on passing it into law.

Mike Pence, a former American vice-president under Donald Trump, said history will hold Mr Trump accountable for his role in the attack on the Capitol on January 6th 2021. The former president sent several tweets during the events, including one that called on Republicans to “fight”. Mr Pence was in the Capitol building in Washington, DC, when thousands of Mr Trump’s supporters stormed inside.

A judge in Quebec declared that giving someone the middle finger was a “God-given, charter-enshrined right” of “every red-blooded Canadian”. He did so while acquitting a defendant accused of criminal harassment by his neighbour for “flipping the proverbial bird”. The judge also said it was “deplorable” that the claimant had “weaponized the criminal justice system” over “trivial peeves”.

$25bn, global spending on industrial robots in 2020 according to Boston Consulting Group, a consultant. Read the full story


PHOTO: ASSOCIATED PRESS
AUKUS embarks on next steps
On Monday Joe Biden, Anthony Albanese and Rishi Sunak, the leaders of America, Australia and Britain, will meet in San Diego. Aboard the USS Missouri, a Virginia-class attack submarine, they will unveil the next steps in the AUKUS pact they signed 18 months ago, which promised eight nuclear-powered submarines for Australia. They are expected to say that the new sub will be based on Britain’s next-generation attack submarine, known as the SSNR, with plenty of American technology in it. The new iteration, however, is unlikely to be ready until the 2040s.

In the meantime, America will probably deploy its own Virginia-class subs to Australian ports. Australia may lease or buy several of those in the 2030s. The project is ambitious, expensive and risky. If they pull it off, it will deepen American and British involvement in the Pacific and bind together the three countries’ defence industries and navies into the second half of the century.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
India struggles to cool down inflation
The Reserve Bank of India is feeling the heat from high inflation. Even after a prolonged tightening cycle, prices rose by 6.5% year on year in January. That is higher than the central bank’s upper bound of 6%. But inflation has exceeded this bound for much of the past year. New data released on Monday is expected to show that the target was also breached in February, with forecasters predicting an inflation rate of 6.3%. Rising food prices, which account for more than half of India’s consumer-price index, are a big factor. Prices of cereals increased by 16% in January; milk and dairy costs by 9%.

More inflationary pressure looms with summer arriving early. Temperatures across the country in February were the hottest in 146 years. Farmers are fretting that a heatwave and a poor monsoon might wilt their crops. And that will get central bankers sweating: poor crop yields will drive up food prices.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Czech Republic turns to the West
On Monday Petr Pavel, the Czech Republic’s newly inaugurated president, will embark on his first foreign trip. Following tradition, this will be to Slovakia (the two countries comprised Czechoslovakia until its break-up in 1992). While the Czech presidency is largely ceremonial, Mr Pavel’s election mattered. A retired NATO general and pro-EU liberal Mr Pavel took over from Milos Zeman, who had cultivated relations with Russia and China. In contrast to his populist predecessor, Mr Pavel will be keen to signal that his country looks firmly to the West.

Shoring up alliances in Europe is his first priority. After Slovakia, Mr Pavel goes to Poland on Thursday. Relations between the pair have been icy after the Czechs took their neighbour to the European Court of Justice in 2021 over a controversial coal mine near the border. The president will then head to Berlin and Brussels. He will try to talk up his country’s clout on the European stage. His staunch support for Ukraine will bolster his case.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Candidates for mayor of Chicago concentrate on crime
Having spent the weekend glad-handing supporters at St Patrick’s Day celebrations—which the Windy City celebrates the week before March 17th—Chicago’s mayoral candidates will get no rest this week. Paul Vallas and Brandon Johnson, the two contenders remaining after the first round of the election in February, must now prepare to discuss crime at yet another “mayoral forum” taking place on Tuesday.

Mr Vallas, a conservative-leaning former chief-executive of Chicago’s school system, promises to be much tougher on crime and has the backing of the police union. Meanwhile Mr Johnson, a left-wing member of the Cook County commission and former teacher, believes that investing in social services is the best way to stop violence. The split between the two men, both Democrats, speaks to a wider issue within the party. President Joe Biden recently indicated that he thinks being seen as weak on crime is damaging their chances with the electorate. Chicago’s run-off election on April 4th will put that theory to the test.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A new book reveals why women kill
Tired of her new husband’s ardour, Rose complained to a friend. “Just finish him,” the friend replied. “Go to our Suzy. She will give you something.” That “something” was arsenic and Suzy, the local midwife, manufactured it in her home. “The Angel Makers”, a gripping new book, tells of the killing spree in the Hungarian village of Nagyrev and nearby locales in the early 20th century that Suzy helped facilitate.

In 1929, 29 women and two men were put on trial for the murders of 42 men; 16 women were convicted. Several in the guilty group said they became poisoners out of desperation: they could not feed another child, or they lived with an abusive man and had little recourse to justice. But the grim tale—which has also been the subject of a documentary and a novel—offers insight into the darker side of human nature, too. For some, murder was a way to deal with minor inconveniences.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Monday: In Norse mythology, which figures guide the souls of the dead to Valhalla?

The whole secret of life is to be interested in one thing profoundly and a thousand other things well.

Hugh Walpole
