The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 17, 2023

A judge released parts of a grand-jury report assessing Donald Trump’s interference in the 2020 presidential election in Georgia. It is not yet clear whether there will be any indictments, but jurors believe that some witnesses may have committed perjury. They concluded that widespread electoral fraud did not take place in the state, and that the result should not be overturned, despite the former president’s claims to the contrary.

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, told the BBC that he would not concede land to Russia if the countries were to broker a peace deal. Earlier, Alexander Lukashenko, the president of Belarus and an ally of Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, said that he would only join Russia’s invasion of Ukraine if attacked first. The two leaders will meet near Moscow on Friday.

YouTube’s chief executive, Susan Wojcicki, is stepping down after leading the video platform since 2014. Ms Wojcicki was an early employee of Google, which owns YouTube, and helped build its online-advertising business. Her departure comes as YouTube faces slowing revenue growth and the ever-tricky challenge of policing content. Neal Mohan, YouTube’s chief product officer, will head the firm.

Tesla said it would issue an over-the-air software update to 362,800 cars equipped withs its driver-assistance software, which is marketed as Full Self-Driving Beta. America’s auto-safety regulator reportedly pressed for the recall—which, in this case, can be implemented remotely—and said that cars with the feature have been known to violate local traffic laws. Tesla’s share price shed nearly 6%.

Jes Staley, the former boss of Barclays, exchanged more than a thousand emails, including photos of young women, with Jeffrey Epstein while he worked at JPMorgan as the late financier’s private banker. The trove was revealed in a court filing by the US Virgin Islands, where Epstein owned a home, as part of its suit against JPMorgan for allegedly facilitating Epstein’s sexual predation. The bank has denied those claims. Mr Staley is not a defendant in the suit.

Amid rising diplomatic tensions China put two American defence contractors, Lockheed Martin and Raytheon Technologies, on its “unreliable entities list” after they sold arms to Taiwan. Last February the companies faced sanctions for selling arms worth $100m to the island. China claims Taiwan as its own, but America supports its right to self-govern.

Centrica, the owner of British gas, reported record profits of £3.3bn ($4bn), triple its earnings in the previous year, after energy prices rose across Europe. Its customer base grew by 4%. But the success of Britain’s largest energy provider comes as the country grapples with a cost-of-living crunch, and follows accusations of the company force-fitting prepayment metres in the homes of vulnerable customers.

Fact of the day: 57%, the proportion of Scots who say they “don’t know” who should take over from Nicola Sturgeon. Read the full story.

A geopolitical gathering in Munich

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
It is not just the year-old Russian war on Ukraine that has made for a tense run-up to the Munich Security Conference—an annual jamboree for diplomats, soldiers and security wonks—opening on Friday. The logistically stalwart host has faced local hitches: a strike looks set to paralyse airports, including Munich’s. On Wednesday an accidental severing of a fibre-optic cable grounded Germany’s main airline, Lufthansa.

If the 500-odd participants, among them presidents, prime ministers and more than 80 defence and foreign ministers, arrive as planned, their three-day huddle will be busy. Russia’s looming offensive tops concerns as western allies of Ukraine struggle to rally fence-sitters in Asia, Latin America and Africa. Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state, and Wang Yi, China’s top diplomat, are rumoured to be meeting in Munich amid tensions over Chinese spy balloons in North America. But one veteran participant⁠—Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov⁠—has pointedly not been invited.

China’s aggressive overseas lending

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A clutch of heavily indebted poor countries will meet with creditors on Friday at a meeting convened by the IMF, the World Bank and India, the current president of the G20. Their leaders hope to iron out disagreements over debt restructuring that have kept a number of low- and middle-income economies in costly limbo.

The shocks of the past few years have left many poorer places, like Sri Lanka and Ethiopia, with unpayable debt burdens. In the past such economies mostly borrowed from rich countries or development agencies like the World Bank. As members of the Paris Club, they often co-operated on debt restructuring.

But in recent years China has become the emerging world’s biggest sovereign lender. Its reluctance to accept losses, or follow normal Paris Club practice, has prevented debt-ensnared economies from returning to fiscal health. China’s participation in Friday’s talks will have rich and poor countries alike hoping for a resolution.


A glimmer of hope over Kosovo

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Friday marks the 15th anniversary of Kosovo’s declaration of independence from Serbia. But Serbia (as well as Russia, China and five European Union members) still refuses to recognise Kosovo’s statehood. Its government exerts influence on Kosovo’s politics through a small Serbian minority in an otherwise overwhelmingly ethnically Albanian country. Tensions regularly flare.

The two countries have conducted EU-brokered negotiations for over a decade with no conclusion. But Western countries are now pressing hard for a deal; they fear that a violent Balkan flare-up would distract from the war in Ukraine and serve the interests of the Kremlin. A trade-off appears to be in the offing: Serbia would treat Kosovo as a state for practical purposes (without formally recognising it) and Kosovars would grant autonomy to Serb-dominated municipalities.

But not everyone is happy. Aleksandar Vucic, Serbia’s president, says that the EU could halt his country’s bid for membership if he does not compromise over Kosovo. But the chances of a resolution to the dispute—if still small—seem better than ever.

The fashion industry in flux

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
China’s reopening is a boon—the country is expected to account for half of the growth in the luxury sector this year. But off the runway, the industry is undergoing rapid change.

A boom in e-commerce during the pandemic was followed by a mass return of customers to shops, forcing companies to invest in both online and offline channels. Brands like Shein, a Chinese online retailer, are using artificial intelligence to shorten turnaround times for delivering new items in response to trends. The industry is embracing more influencers and celebrities. This week Pharrell Williams, a music producer, was appointed Louis Vuitton’s creative director for menswear.

But with change comes uncertainty—aggravated by inflationary pressure, soaring energy prices and economic volatility. Shoppers will be more selective. Mid-sized mass-market brands, in particular, must find new ways to stand out.

Will Qatar buy Man Utd?

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The English Premier League is booming. Its football clubs are surging ahead, at least financially, of their European counterparts. No wonder plutocrats and petrostates are prowling. Jahm Najafi, an Iranian-American billionaire, is reportedly interested in buying Tottenham Hotspur for $3.75bn. On Friday, however, Qatar, through a state-backed investment fund, is expected to bid a far higher amount for Manchester United.

Britain’s best-supported club is up for sale after its much-loathed American owners, the Glazer family, said they were willing to “explore strategic alternatives”. Friday is the soft deadline for bids. Several parties are interested, but it is the prospect of Qatari ownership that is dividing United fans. Some hope that the emirs could return the club to glory. Others are left queasy by the prospect of the controversial Gulf state using the club for a bit of “sportswashing”, much like when it hosted last year’s World Cup.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Please note, the way we choose winners has changed. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Friday: What was the popular term for the events of October 20th, 1973 when Richard Nixon saw his attorney general and his deputy leave office?

Thursday: Which busy traffic intersection is the point from which official highway traffic distances from New York are measured?

Prejudice makes prisoners of both the hated and the hater.

Randy Shilts
