The world in brief
June 1, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

German inflation fell sharply in May. Prices rose by 6.3% in the latest twelve months, down from 7.6% a month earlier (measured by the harmonised index of consumer prices, which is comparable across countries). On the same measure French inflation also slowed to 6%, its lowest level in a year; economists had predicted 6.4%. Good news from the euro zone’s two largest economies buoyed hopes that the European Central Bank may soon stop raising interest rates.

America’s House of Representatives is preparing to take a final vote on a deal that would suspend the country’s debt ceiling and avoid a sovereign default. Republican House speaker Kevin McCarthy continued his quest to secure support for the deal from his party’s members, some of whom want deeper spending cuts. The vote is expected to take place later on Wednesday.

Germany announced it would force Russia to close four of its consulates by the end of the year by revoking their licenses. The decision is retaliatory: last week Russia limited the number of German officials allowed to work there to 350, which will require Germany to shut several of its own consulates. A German spokesperson said the Russian move was a “step of escalation”.

Chinese factory output contracted in May compared with the previous month, raising fears over the country’s stalling economic recovery. The National Bureau of Statistics reported that its purchasing managers index for manufacturing fell to 48.8. (A figure below 50 implies contraction.) The reading for China’s “non-manufacturing” PMI, which covers construction and services, fared better at 54.5.

At least five people were killed and 19 were wounded by shelling in Luhansk, a Russian-controlled region in eastern Ukraine. Russia blamed Ukraine for the attack. The governor of Krasnodar, a region in southern Russia, also said Ukrainian drones had caused a fire at a Russian oil refinery. On Tuesday Vladimir Putin vowed to improve air defences around Moscow after the capital was hit by a drone attack.

The Sudanese army pulled out of ceasefire talks with the Rapid Support Forces in the Saudi city of Jeddah. The army blamed the paramilitary group’s “repeated violations” of two short-term ceasefires that had been successfully negotiated between the two warring factions. Now in its sixth week, the conflict in Sudan has displaced 1.4m internally; a further 350,000 people have fled abroad.

Kosovo’s sporting authorities denounced Novak Djokovic, a Serbian tennis star, for stirring political unrest. After winning a match at the French Open, Mr Djokovic spoke out in favour of Kosovo’s Serbian minority population after violent clashes broke out with NATO peacekeepers over disputed elections. The Kosovo Tennis Federation said it planned to ask other tennis bodies to fine Mr Djokovic.

Figure of the day: 124, the number of countries and territories that recorded fertility rates below 2.1, the figure needed to keep a population stable over time, in 2021. Read the full story.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
Bringing down euro-zone inflation
In April, headline inflation in the euro zone ticked up slightly, from 6.9% in March to 7.0%. That was well below the peak in October, when inflation hit 10.6%. Still, the rise signalled that the way down to the European Central Bank’s inflation target of 2% was going to be slower than hoped. The release of May’s inflation data on Thursday will show whether the pace has accelerated over the past few weeks.

There is some hope. On Tuesday it emerged that Spanish inflation fell to 2.9%, within hitting distance of the ECB’s target. Figures from France and Germany, released on Wednesday, were also positive. Yet Spain’s core inflation, which strips out volatile energy and food prices, fell by just 0.5% to an uncomfortably high 6.1%. And Dutch wages rose by a chunky 5.7% in April, compared with a year earlier. Euro-zone inflation could remain stubbornly elevated for a while yet.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The European Political Community meets
Nearly 50 European leaders will meet near Chisinau, Moldova’s capital, on Thursday for the second meeting of the “European Political Community”. The brainchild of France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, the EPC was launched last October. Sceptics assumed it was a French ploy to block enlargement of the European Union. But Mr Macron argued that the club provided a way to display European unity beyond the EU’s 27 members and to discuss collective security. Attendees include Britain and Ukraine, though Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, pulled out.

On Wednesday Mr Macron gave a speech in Slovakia in which he said that EU enlargement should take place “the faster the better” and called for a “path towards” NATO membership for Ukraine. And for once he mostly avoided the term “strategic autonomy”, a call for Europe to defend itself rather than relying on America that irks many fellow Europeans. The symbolism of unity will be strong at the EPC summit, which takes place just 21km from Moldova’s border with war-battered Ukraine.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Lululemon’s alluring figures
Lululemon, a Canadian purveyor of yoga gear, will report its first-quarter results on Thursday. The company’s sales rocketed during the pandemic, when locked-down office workers swapped slacks for stretch-wear. Sales roughly doubled between the final quarters of 2019 and 2022.

Analysts expect 19% year-on-year sales growth for the most recent quarter, slower but still rosy given the sluggishness in discretionary spending in America, the company’s biggest market. Analysts also expect gross profits to have grown faster than sales, which would imply the firm has resisted boosting revenue figures by cutting prices.

Lululemon’s success has attracted plenty of competition. Besides sportswear giants like Nike, the firm is also battling newcomers such as Alo Yoga, a favourite with Gen Z. Still, that has not yet cramped Lululemon’s growth, even as other pandemic darlings have faded. The company’s continued success is thanks in part to its forays into other areas of casual attire. Its ABC (“anti-ball-crushing”) men’s trousers have been a particular hit.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
E-scooter bans are spreading
On Thursday several rail companies in London and south-east England will start banning electric scooters from their trains. The measure is a response to concerns about fire risk from the lithium-ion batteries that power the vehicles. It is the latest example of growing resistance to e-scooters, often touted as an efficient pollution-free way to move around cities. Recent months have seen other bans on the devices from rail operators across Britain. In April, after a string of accidents, Parisians voted to forbid the use of rental e-scooters.

Critics of the vehicles argue that shared e-scooter schemes, which allow users to hop on and off devices spread across a city centre, are a hazard. Users leave the bulky scooters on pavements, where they are often damaged. That increases the risk of battery fires. Still, as cities race to deal with air pollution and other climate challenges, “clean” mobility remains an appealing idea. For e-scooters to become a sustainable solution, however, careful management may be required.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
A biennale to save Venice
Venice’s first Sustainability Biennale, which begins on Thursday, focuses on the city’s mobile sea barrier, the world’s largest. Called MOSE, an allusion to the biblical Moses, the system features 78 massive floodgates that periodically rise from underwater to block high tides that would otherwise flood Venice and its lagoon. It cost €5.5bn to build and began operating last year. But sea levels are rising faster than once forecast and MOSE will not be able to protect Venice forever. The biennale’s exhibitions and events will explore options for when it can no longer cope.

That prospect is still distant. Nevertheless, the Sustainability Biennale seeks to concentrate minds. One relatively inexpensive solution mooted by hydraulic engineers is to pump seawater deep underground at high enough pressure to lift Venice, over a decade, by 25cm, and maybe a bit more. The proposal spooks some. But it might be better than sealing off the lagoon entirely—or dismantling Venice’s treasured buildings for reassembly elsewhere.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which city in Connacht, in the west of Ireland, is noted for its arts festival and folk music?

Wednesday: Which 2011 book by Daniel Kahneman outlines the ways that human decision-making can be irrational?

There are times when the utmost daring is the height of wisdom.

Carl von Clausewitz
