The world in brief
April 6, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Volodomyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, met Andrzej Duda, his Polish counterpart, in Warsaw, Poland’s capital. After the two spoke in private, Mr Duda said that he would seek “additional guarantees” for Ukraine at an upcoming NATO summit. Mr Zelensky thanked Poland for standing “shoulder to shoulder” with his country. Poland has been a staunch supporter of its neighbour, welcoming more than 1m Ukrainian refugees and galvanising Western military support for the country.

The World Trade Organisation said that growth in global trade will slow to 1.7% this year, down from 2.7% in 2022. In October, the WTO projected that trade would grow by 1%, but has since revised this prediction to take in easing supply-chain pressures. The organisation’s chief economist blamed lingering effects from covid-19 and rising geopolitical tensions for the below average figures.

Law-enforcement agencies in 17 countries shut down Genesis Market, an online platform selling stolen credentials for the purpose of identity fraud. About 120 people were arrested in the operation, dubbed “Cookie Monster” by the FBI. Email and social-media passwords were available for sale on Genesis, as were “cookies” to conceal who had actually accessed those accounts.

TotalEnergies, a French oil major, signed a $10bn deal with the government of Iraq to boost oil and gas production in the country. Total will hold a 45% stake in the project; Iraq’s state-owned Basrah Oil Company will take 30%. The deal is a boon for Iraq, which has struggled to lure investors to its energy sector.

Silvio Berlusconi, Italy’s former prime minister and billionaire media tycoon, is in intensive care in a hospital in Milan. The 86-year-old has had several recent bouts of ill health, having suffered with prostate cancer and undergone major heart surgery in 2016. Mr Berlusconi dominated Italian politics for almost two decades, but was a disaster as a national leader.

Peter Murrell, the husband of Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s former first minister, was arrested “as a suspect” in a police investigation into the finances of the Scottish National Party. The probe was launched after concerns were raised about the mishandling of £600,000 ($750,000) of donations raised by the party. Ms Sturgeon resigned from her position in February, citing the “brutality” of modern politics.

Israeli police attacked worshippers in Jerusalem’s al-Aqsa Mosque on Wednesday, according to Palestinian media. In a statement, Israeli police said they were responding to riots in the mosque’s compound. The incident triggered protests across the West Bank. Tensions are running high in the region as the Muslim holy month of Ramadan coincides with Judaism’s Passover.

Fact of the day: $700bn, the amount that the International Monetary Fund has lent to 150 countries in the nearly 80 years since its creation. Read the full story.


PHOTO: DAVE SIMONDS
The IMF prepares for spring
On Thursday Kristalina Georgieva, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, will give a curtain-raising speech ahead of the Spring Meetings—the joint jamboree of the IMF and the World Bank. Finance ministers and central bankers will descend on Washington, DC, for this year’s event, which starts on April 10th.

Three issues will dominate the agenda. The first is the IMF’s eye-wateringly generous $16bn bailout of Ukraine. That comes with interest rates equivalent to commercial loans, and there is uncertainty over the country’s ability to repay. The second is the IMF’s approach to climate change, and what financial assistance it is capable of providing for adaptation and mitigation. The third is how to ease distressed and defaulting countries’ debts—China, now the world’s biggest official creditor, is opposed to reducing their face value. None of these problems are easy to resolve. But poor countries need solutions, and fast. Zambia, for example, has been waiting for more than two years to have its debts restructured.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
German industries are on the up
On Thursday Destatis, Germany’s statistics agency, will publish figures for industrial production in February. They are likely to show a continuation of the recovery that started in January, when industrial production was up by 3.5% from the previous month. Energy-intensive industries, such as metalworking and chemical production, took advantage of lower energy prices to ramp up their output.

The increase in industrial production means that Germany is likely to avoid a recession this year. On April 5th five top economic research institutes raised their joint forecast for economic growth to 0.3% this year and 1.5% next year. That is a marked improvement: in the autumn, when energy prices were still soaring, they had predicted a contraction of 0.4% for 2023. Even so, inflation is still a worry. It will probably decline only slowly across this year, from 6.9% to 6%. And the global economy remains weak. Households are reining in their consumption, not just abroad but in Germany, too.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Putin meets his cautious “co-aggressor”
When they last met in December, Alexander Lukashenko, the Belarusian dictator, quipped to Vladimir Putin, his Russian counterpart, that they were “co-aggressors: the meanest, most toxic people on the planet”. That looks increasingly true. In February 2022 Russia launched its invasion of Ukraine from Belarusian territory; it has since exploited its ally’s railways, airfields and morgues. Mr Putin recently announced plans to station nuclear weapons in the country.

The pair meet again on Thursday in Moscow for a summit on the “union state”, a years-long project to integrate the economies and defence capabilities of the two countries. One tricky topic will be Mr Lukashenko’s call last Friday for “an immediate ceasefire” in Ukraine. Belarus is wary of being forced into a more active military role. Unlike Russians, Belarusians are anti-war. Their country’s ill-equipped troops would face a beating, and it would be subject to more European sanctions. Mr Lukashenko may be hoping that Mr Putin is less mean than he portrays him to be.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Levi Strauss is still as tough as denim
Levi Strauss, the world’s largest maker of jeans, has had a stretching few years. Demand for denim was skinny during pandemic lockdowns in 2020, then flared out through 2021 as consumers left their houses and updated their wardrobes after lockdown. Over the past 12 months business has slimmed down again as inflation has suppressed spending (and fashion trends have shifted towards twill and corduroy and away from denim). Levi Strauss’s sales fell by 6% year-on-year in the final quarter of 2022.

Still, that was better than analysts had expected, which should provide reassurance to investors ahead of the company’s first-quarter results on Thursday. Levi Strauss has diversified its offerings, which helps. Denim trousers now account for only 60% of sales; in late 2021 the company bought Beyond Yoga, a maker of “athleisure” attire (leggings and the like). It has also increased its presence in relatively fast-growing economies. This week the company opened a store in the Indian city of Bangalore, its largest in Asia.


PHOTO: DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI / TATE
Elizabeth Siddal and the Pre-Raphaelites
Art is not always glamorous. When Elizabeth Siddal posed as a drowning silver-clad Ophelia for John Edward Millais’s famous painting, she lay for hours in a tin bath filled with chilly water. She longed to create her own art, but as a working-class woman in 19th-century London, she was often overshadowed by the work of others.

“The Rossettis”—which opens at London’s Tate Britain gallery on Thursday—offers a reassessment of Siddal. Along with works by her husband, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, the exhibition presents an almost complete collection of her watercolours and drawings.

Siddal died of a laudanum overdose two years in to her marriage; she is often cast as a tragic muse to the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, the artistic movement which Rossetti helped establish. But the show reveals how many of the poses Siddal depicted in her artworks are echoed in Rossetti’s later paintings. Siddal was much more than a dreamy-eyed, lush-locked “stunner”, as Rossetti called his models. She was an artist in her own right.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Thursday: Which cartoon character originally appeared in a film called “Steamboat Willie”?

Wednesday: “Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore” and “No longer mourn for me when I am dead” are the first lines of which forms of poetry by which author?

Violence is the last refuge of the incompetent.

Issac Asimov
