The world in brief April 25, 2022
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated at 05:44 GMT+1 London
School massacre in Texas, US Treasury department blocks Russia from paying down debt, and more

A man shot and killed at least 19 children and two adults at an elementary school in Uvalde, Texas, according to local officials. Greg Abbott, Texas’s governor, said the suspected murderer, an 18-year-old man, was killed by police. The massacre comes on the heels of mass shootings in Buffalo, New York, and southern California. In response President Joe Biden pleaded with the nation to “stand up to the gun lobby”. “Why are we willing to live with this carnage?”, he asked. “Active-shooter” incidents have increased by nearly 97% since 2017, according to new data from the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

North Korea launched three missiles, apparently including an intercontinental ballistic missile, according to the South Korean government. The country is banned by the UN Security Council from testing ICBMs—but has been doing so nonetheless, recently. The day before, while Mr Biden attended a summit in Tokyo, Chinese and Russian bombers flew a joint mission over the Sea of Japan.

Brian Kemp, Georgia’s governor, defeated an effort to unseat him in his state’s Republican primary. Mr Kemp earned Donald Trump’s wrath by refusing to try to overturn his defeat in the presidential election of 2020. So Mr Trump backed a former senator, David Perdue, who played the loyalist; his loss may embolden non-Trumpist Republicans in November’s mid-term elections.

America’s Treasury department said it would block Russia from paying down dollar-denominated debt, raising the prospect of its heading into sovereign default soon. American banks and investors have been free to process and receive Russian bond payments since the war started, but those licences lapse on Wednesday. Janet Yellen, the Treasury secretary, has said a Russian default would have little impact elsewhere, since Russia is “already cut off from global capital markets”.

Moldovan authorities detained Igor Dodon, a former president and head of the country’s pro-Russian opposition party, while he is investigated for corruption and treason. Moldova’s anti-corruption prosecutor said the probe is looking into whether Mr Dodon accepted illicit funds. A spokesman for the Kremlin said the detention was akin to “persecuting supporters of friendly, mutually advantageous relations with Russia”.

New homes sales in America fell by 16.6% from March to April, suggesting that rising interest rates are cooling the country’s overheated housing market. The drop in the seasonally-adjusted annual rate, from 709,000 to 591,000 homes sold, was the biggest monthly decline since 2013. Higher mortgage rates may be reducing buyer demand, but the market remains tight thanks to limited supply and sluggish construction.

Glencore said it would plead guilty to bribery and corruption charges in Britain and America, and pay at least $1.2bn to settle criminal and civil probes there. Anti-corruption investigators in Britain charged the world’s largest commodities trader with seven counts of bribery to secure access to oil in Africa. As part of its deal with American prosecutors, Glencore agreed to accept an independent compliance monitor for three years.

Fact of the day: Two, the number of working petrol stations on the 550km road from Lviv to Kyiv. 


A school shooting in Texas leaves 21 dead

The details are horrifying, yet the story is sickeningly familiar. On Tuesday an 18-year-old man fatally shot 19 pupils and two adults at a school in Uvalde, Texas, before being killed by police, officials said. It was the second-deadliest elementary-school shooting in American history. The first was nearly a decade ago, when 26 people were murdered at Sandy Hook in Newtown, Connecticut. The Uvalde attack was the deadliest shooting this year, surpassing the racially-motivated massacre at a supermarket in Buffalo, New York, on May 14th.

Despite these repeated tragedies, Americans’ appetite for gun control is diminishing. Only 52% of Americans in 2021 believed that the laws covering the sale of firearms should be made stricter, down from 67% in 2018, according to Gallup. Meanwhile annual gun production increased from 3.9m firearms in 2000 to 11.3m in 2020. Congress is unlikely to pass gun-control legislation, just as it failed to do after Sandy Hook. Yet more depressing déjà vu.


The official verdict on Partygate

A long-delayed report into “Partygate”, the scandal of boozy parties and ABBA singalongs at the heart of the British government during covid-19 lockdowns, may be published at last on Wednesday. The police have already concluded their investigation into breaches of covid laws, issuing 126 fines to 83 people including the prime minister, Boris Johnson, his wife, and the chancellor of the exchequer.

The police report was damaging to the government. The new report by Sue Gray, a senior civil servant, could be more harmful still—not least because it will include photographs of partygoers, glasses in hand. One such snap of Mr Johnson, released on May 23rd, caused a storm.

Known as a fearless arbiter of the code of conduct covering ministerial behaviour, Ms Gray is unlikely to hold back in apportioning blame. Mr Johnson will have to defend himself in Parliament, again. It will be a rowdy affair, with his very future as prime minister at stake.

Remembering George Floyd

America’s latest mass shooting came just before the two-year anniversary of the murder of George Floyd, an unarmed black man, at the hands of a white police officer. That event sparked global protests. A video of Mr Floyd gasping for breath while Derek Chauvin knelt on his neck was viewed around the world. The second anniversary of his death, on Wednesday, will be marked by candlelight vigils in Minneapolis, where he died, and beyond.


Mr Chauvin was convicted of murder and manslaughter and in June received a sentence of 22 years and six months. Three other officers involved were also convicted of civil-rights violations. Their crimes also prompted calls for institutional change. More than 30 states have since passed police-reform legislation and many cities have found alternatives to police being sent to non-violent incidents. But the progress through Congress of the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act, a bill that aimed to enforce police accountability, stalled after being blocked in the Senate. Despite public support, reform at a federal level will probably go no further.


The road to COP27 starts at the G7

Climate change has slipped down the geopolitical agenda in recent months. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has upended the world order and threatened a global food shortage. But ahead of COP27, the United Nations’ next climate conference, in November, international climate diplomacy is starting up again. It will begin in earnest at a three-day meeting of the G7, which starts in Berlin on Wednesday.

At COP27, to be held in Sharm el-Sheikh, in Egypt, countries must work out how to put into practice the commitments made at COP26, held in Glasgow in Scotland last year. That will depend on how much financial support rich countries, which have just shelled out billions of dollars in aid to Ukraine, are prepared to stump up. Several less-rich ones, notably India, Indonesia and Vietnam, are looking for huge packages to help them to decarbonise their economies. They see the G7 as the place to hash out a deal. Let the haggling begin (again).



Starliner’s mission accomplished—at least, so far


On May 20th an uncrewed Boeing Starliner arrived at the International Space Station. On Wednesday it is due to undock and return to Earth. If all goes well and the spacecraft survives the fiery heat of re-entry it will touch down in New Mexico.

Engineers at Boeing, an aerospace giant, and NASA, America’s space agency, will be watching with crossed fingers. After the retirement of the Space Shuttle, in 2011, Boeing, along with SpaceX, was one of two American companies contracted by NASA to provide flights to the ISS. SpaceX now makes flights regularly. But Boeing’s first attempt, in 2019, was a disaster. Technical problems prevented the mission from reaching the ISS and nearly doomed the spacecraft. Soon America may have two ways of getting to the space station. And Boeing, whose reputation has taken a serious knock in recent years, will have a technical success to celebrate.


The cause of America’s baby-formula shortage

Of all the supply problems America has faced over the past two years, this may be the most critical. More than 40% of baby formula is out of stock, putting bottle-fed babies at risk. On Wednesday a congressional panel will grill Robert Califf, the embattled head of the Food and Drug Administration, to find out what went wrong.

The proximate cause was a suspension in production at a factory owned by Abbott, which makes nearly half the country’s formula. The FDA ordered the halt because of a bacterial outbreak, although a subsequent inspection failed to prove a link to the plant. But there are deeper questions about why a single closure caused so much disruption. The FDA has been restrictive in approving imports and too slow to anticipate shortages. Another explanation is excessive industrial concentration—just four companies dominate the market. The government has flown in powder from Europe, but a longer-term solution is needed.


Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Wednesday: What is the capital of the German state of Lower Saxony?
Tuesday: Which aircraft was the Royal Air Force’s main bomber in its campaign against Germany during the second world war?


