The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

February 16, 2023

Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, resigned after eight years in power. Ms Sturgeon, who will also stand down as leader of the Scottish National Party, is a fierce advocate for Scottish independence but in November her government suffered a setback when the Supreme Court ruled against a second referendum. Ms Sturgeon said that her decision to quit was not a reaction to “short-term pressures”, but that the job had taken its toll.

David Malpass will step down as president of the World Bank by June, nearly a year before his five-year term ends. Appointed by the Trump administration, Mr Malpass was criticised last autumn for initially refusing to state that human activity had contributed to global warming. America’s treasury secretary recently demanded that the World Bank take “bolder and more imaginative” steps to tackle climate change.

American retail sales rose by 3% in January over the previous month, the biggest increase since March 2021. After falling for two months in a row, consumer spending grew in most sectors, although inflation contributed in part to the rise. Thus, the figures are good for American retailers, but a sign that inflationary pressures remain. That could persuade the Federal Reserve to further raise interest rates.

Israel passed a law to revoke Israeli Arabs’ citizenship and Palestinians’ residency rights if they have been convicted of terrorism or receive funds from the Palestinian Authority. The PA gives stipends to the families of Palestinian prisoners who have attacked Israelis; already Israel freezes those assets. Human-rights groups criticised the law for rendering people stateless.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, vowed to continue rescue efforts and promised to rebuild the buildings destroyed by devastating earthquakes last week. Mr Erdogan said more than 105,000 people had been injured by the quakes. Ten survivors were rescued in Turkey on Tuesday, including a 77-year-old woman pulled from the rubble of an apartment block. The death toll in Turkey and Syria has now passed 41,000.

At least 73 migrants are missing and presumed dead after their ship sank near the Libyan coast. There were around 80 people in the boat hoping to make the journey from north Africa to Europe. Nearly 140 people have been declared missing in the central Mediterranean this year. A spokesperson for the International Organization for Migration called the situation “intolerable”.

North Koreans who share a name with a daughter of the country’s dictator, Kim Jong Un, are reportedly being told to change it. The move seems to be an effort to create an air of mystery around Ju Ae, a child described by news agencies as “adorable” and “noble”. Her face, which bears an uncanny resemblance to her father’s, features on the country’s stamps.

Fact of the day: 3,000, the number of volunteers for the White Helmets, a Syrian emergency-response force. Read the full story.

Scottish independence after Sturgeon

PHOTO: REUTERS
Three weeks ago Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, said she did not feel “anywhere near” stepping down. On Wednesday she resigned, citing the heavy toll the job has taken on her personal life. This leaves Scotland’s independence movement at a crossroads.

The Scottish National Party, to which she belongs, has been in power in Scotland since 2007, and champions the country leaving the United Kingdom. Ms Sturgeon took over as leader in 2014, shortly after a referendum in which Scottish voters rejected independence. Since then there has been stalemate. Britain’s government has refused permission for another referendum and last year the Supreme Court ruled that Scotland’s devolved government lacked the authority to organise its own.

Ms Sturgeon will remain first minister until a replacement is found. In March SNP members will vote on whether to treat the next general election, due by January 2025, as a de facto referendum. This is a gamble. Voters are roughly split on independence and more than two thirds of Scots oppose a proxy referendum. But the SNP’s most immediate problem is the departure of a charismatic and canny leader with no clear successor.


Wang Yi’s European tour

PHOTO: EYEVINE
On Thursday China’s most senior diplomat, Wang Yi, will be in Italy to meet the country’s prime minister, Giorgia Meloni. It will be Mr Wang’s third day of a European tour that has already taken him to France and is expected to include stops at the EU in Brussels, as well as Germany, Hungary and Russia.

The trip comes amid a row over Chinese surveillance balloons, one of which was shot down by America over the Atlantic on February 4th. The balloon’s incursion into American airspace caused America’s secretary of state, Antony Blinken, to cancel a visit to Beijing that was planned for last week. In Germany Mr Wang is expected to attend the Munich Security Conference, an annual gathering of security and military bigwigs which begins on Friday. A rumoured meeting there with Mr Blinken would aim to lower tensions. But Mr Wang’s visit to Russia, days before the anniversary of the invasion of Ukraine, highlights another sore spot in China’s relations with the West: its tacit support for Vladimir Putin’s unprovoked aggression.

Arresting Hong Kong’s decline

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The last time Hong Kong released population data it revealed an exodus. Some 121,500 Hong Kongers—1.6% of the population—fled in the 12 months to June 2022. They were escaping a recession, one of the world’s highest covid death rates and a crippling covid-containment regime. They were also fleeing the repression that came in 2020 with a swingeing national-security law. The government will, then, be nervous when new figures are released on Thursday.

Hong Kong’s chief executive, John Lee, knows the territory has a problem. The former security chief remains committed to suppressing freedoms. But he has launched a scheme to allow international high-flyers to relocate to the city without needing a job offer, to fill gaps left by skedaddling executives. Thousands of new homes are planned to help reduce eye-watering property costs. And many covid restrictions have finally been lifted, although a strict mask mandate endures. That may not be enough to arrest Hong Kong’s decline.

Will Paramount’s reboot succeed?

PHOTO: LANDMARK MEDIA
“Unscripted”, a book published this week, chronicles the dysfunctional final years of Sumner Redstone, a nonagenarian billionaire, and his family atop the sprawling media empire he founded. (Redstone died in 2020.) Paramount Global, that conglomerate, which includes CBS, MTV, Paramount Pictures, Showtime and Simon & Schuster, is now run by his daughter, Shari Redstone. On Thursday it will report its latest quarterly results.

While Paramount’s share price is nearly 40% below its level twelve months ago, a rally in recent weeks suggests increasing optimism over Ms Redstone’s stewardship. Paramount+, its streaming service, has garnered some 55m subscribers in under two years. “Top Gun: Maverick”, an action reboot starring Tom Cruise and produced by Paramount Pictures, was a hit last year. A new buyer is being sought for Simon & Schuster, a book publisher, after a proposed merger with Penguin Random House was blocked on competition grounds. Investors will be hoping for more signs of a successful reboot.

Berlin’s International Film Festival

PHOTO: DPA
The 73rd Berlinale film festival begins in the German capital on Thursday. Among some 400 screenings, 19 films will vie to win Golden and Silver Bears. Contenders include “Le Grand Chariot” (“The Plough”), by Philippe Garrel, a French director, which tells the story of three generations of puppeteers, a dying profession. In “BlackBerry” Matt Johnson, a young Canadian director, dramatises the rise and fall of the pioneering smartphone-maker.

But the festival’s reputation is for political art. Thus, “Superpower”, a documentary about Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, will have its world premiere at the festival on Friday. Its American directors, Sean Penn and Aaron Kaufman, began the film long before the invasion, intending to document Mr Zelensky’s journey from stand-up comic to head of state. But they were in Kyiv on February 24th 2022 when the Russian army crossed the border, and captured Mr Zelensky’s overnight transformation from besuited politician to combat-fatigue-wearing war hero.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com.

Please note, the way we choose winners has changed. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Thursday: Which busy traffic intersection is the point from which official highway traffic distances from New York are measured?

Wednesday: What is the name, in British English, for the salad item Americans call “arugula”?

Only stupid people don’t change their minds.

Boutros Boutros-Ghali
