The world in brief
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Updated 5 hours ago (21:00 GMT+1 / 04:00 Hong Kong)

Russia admitted that Ukrainian forces made a breakthrough in the southern region of Kherson, after Ukraine confirmed its full control of Lyman, a key logistics hub in Donetsk. The two regions were among the four that Russia illegally annexed last week. Meanwhile Russia said it had not yet decided the borders of either Kherson or another annexed province, Zaporizhia. Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesman, said it would “consult” populations in those areas.

Addressing the Conservative Party conference, Britain’s chancellor, Kwasi Kwarteng, said there had been a “little turbulence” after his “mini-budget” last week, but maintained that the economy needed a “new approach”. Earlier Mr Kwarteng dropped his government’s plan to abolish the 45% bracket for highest-earning taxpayers. Both he and the new prime minister, Liz Truss, had spent the weekend insisting they would not buckle.

Svante Paabo, a Swedish geneticist, won the Nobel prize in physiology or medicine, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences announced. The Nobel committee said that Mr Paabo won the prize, worth 10m Swedish kroner ($895,000), “for his discoveries concerning the genomes of extinct hominins and human evolution”.

The cost of credit default swaps in Credit Suisse soared as the Swiss bank failed to restore market confidence in its liquidity. Reports that the bank was trying to raise capital had led to concerns about its financial strength. Investors sold shares and bonds with the bank, while seeking out CDS, which act as insurance against a company defaulting on debt.

Viktor Orban, Hungary’s prime minister, said Germany’s planned energy support package amounted to “cannibalism in the EU”. Last week Germany unveiled a €200bn ($196bn) “protective shield” for businesses and households struggling with energy bills. Mr Orban said the “bombshell” measure would distort fair competition in the single market and decried the absence of a co-ordinated solution to help European companies.

Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader, expressed support for the country’s police, amid a harsh crackdown on protests in which more than 130 people have been killed. While Mr Khamenei said that the plight of Mahsa Amini, a 22-year-old woman whose death in custody sparked the female-led rebellion, “deeply broke” his heart, he blamed the unrest on foreign enemies.

America’s manufacturing sector grew at its slowest pace in September since May 2020, as demand for new orders declined amid aggressive interest rate rises and high inflation. The Institute for Supply Management’s manufacturing PMI, an index tracking factory activity, fell to 50.9. Economists had forecast 52.2; a reading below 50 indicates the sector is contracting.

Fact of the day: 40%, the proportion of America’s hurricanes which Florida has experienced. Read the full story.

The Kremlin’s botched land grab

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Russian parliament’s approval of the illegal annexation of four Ukrainian regions, expected to be finalised on Tuesday, marks the last stage in President Vladimir Putin’s land grab. The deputies will merely rubber-stamp his proclamation that Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk, and Zaporizhia are part of Russia following fake referendums.

But Mr Putin’s alternative reality adds to his mounting problems. The annexations mean that Russia does not control territories it claims. Ukrainian forces have made significant gains on multiple fronts, taking Lyman, a logistics hub in Donetsk, while pushing back into Kherson province in the south. The setbacks are sowing divisions among Russia’s elite. Nezavisimaya, an influential Russian newspaper, called the loss of Lyman “a political problem”, citing Chechnya’s leader, Ramzan Kadyrov, who blamed senior military figures for making poor tactical decisions. The rebukes do not yet target Mr Putin, but further losses will only heighten tensions among his lieutenants.

America’s worker shortage drags on

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
The Job Openings and Labour Turnover Survey used to be a sideshow in American economic data. Over the past year it has become an essential indicator, providing a glimpse into the ultra-tight job market. On Tuesday it is likely to show that 11m jobs were open in August, roughly double the number of unemployed people. Such a pronounced shortage of workers explains why wages are soaring, putting upward pressure on inflation.

Optimistic economists say that America can have a slowdown in inflation without suffering a steep rise in unemployment. For that to happen, they would want to see a fall in job openings, while the unemployment rate—due next on Friday—holds steady. Pessimists argue that it will take a big hit to growth for job openings to truly fall. Unfortunately, pessimists have a better track record in their forecasts over the past couple of years.


The knotty making of Italy’s government

PHOTO: ROPI
The leadership of the Northern League, an Italian populist party, meets on Tuesday to choose which of its politicians it wants to sit at Giorgia Meloni’s cabinet table. Ms Meloni, the leader of the hard-right Brothers of Italy and prime minister-in-waiting, is struggling to form a team that reassures Italy’s allies and satisfies her partners in the hard right coalition that won September’s election.

Ms Meloni will struggle to place Matteo Salvini, the League’s pugnacious secretary. He wants to resume the campaign against illegal immigration he waged as interior minister in 2018-19. One option is putting him in charge of law and order. But Mr Salvini is on trial for blocking migrants from entering port while in office. There is talk of a deputy premiership. But his past support for Russia makes Italy’s allies in NATO suspicious. He could also be given responsibility for agriculture. But would Mr Salvini, strongly critical of the EU, accept a portfolio in which most important decisions are taken in Brussels?

A police shooting in London

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
On September 5th a Metropolitan Police officer shot dead Chris Kaba, an unarmed black man, after chasing the car he was driving through south London. The killing drew hundreds of protesters to Scotland Yard, London’s police headquarters, to decry racism. Little is known about what caused the officer, who has been suspended, to shoot. An automated system linked the vehicle’s number plates to an earlier firearms offence. But more will become clear after an inquest into Mr Kaba’s death opens on Tuesday. The killing is also being investigated by the Independent Office for Police Conduct, a watchdog.

Mr Kaba’s death puts Britain’s largest police force under fresh scrutiny. Buffeted by scandals, the Met was recently put under investigation by another watchdog and required to produce a remedial plan for its failures. Its new commissioner, Mark Rowley, promised to be “ruthless” in rooting out wrongdoing. Dealing with the inquest into Mr Kaba’s death will be an early test.

Pamuk muses on pandemics and politics

PHOTO: ROPI
Orhan Pamuk, Turkey’s most famous writer, had already spent a few years working on his new novel, a story set against the backdrop of a bubonic plague outbreak in the Ottoman Empire in the early 1900s, when the covid pandemic struck. The prolonged lockdowns and concerns about his own health inspired copious rewrites. The resulting book, “Nights of Plague”, which came out in Turkish last year, is released in America on Tuesday.

The novel centres on a murder mystery on a fictional Ottoman island inhabited by both Turks and Greeks, but also muses about the power of modern states. Some of Mr Pamuk’s characters are familiar: Abdulhamid II, a sultan who struggles to save the Ottoman empire, shares autocratic and Islamist tendencies with Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Another resembles the country’s founder, Kemal Ataturk. Mr Pamuk usually confines his comments on politics to interviews. This book changes that.

Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 BST on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown one winner per continent on Saturday.

Tuesday: Which opera concerns the attempts of Susanna, a maid, to escape the romantic attentions of her employer, Count Almaviva?

Monday: Which device for protecting buildings is generally held to have been invented by Benjamin Franklin?

Marriage is fine as an institution, but bad as a habit.

Buster Keaton
