The world in brief
September 2, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

American employers added 187,000 jobs in August. The unemployment rate ticked up unexpectedly to 3.8%, as people returned to the labour force looking for jobs. Average hourly wages rose by 4.3% on an annual basis, a smaller increase than in the previous month. The subdued figures suggest that America’s resilient labour market is cooling—and that the Federal Reserve’s fight to bring down inflation is going to plan.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, will meet his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, in Sochi, a city in southern Russia, on Monday. They are expected to discuss Russia’s return to the UN-brokered deal which had allowed Ukraine to export grain by ship across the Black Sea. Russia withdrew from the deal in July, and demanded that restrictions be eased on some of its own exports.

Tharman Shanmugaratnam, who served as Singapore’s deputy prime minister until the start of his campaign, was elected the country’s new president. Mr Tharman, who has long-time ties with the People’s Action Party, won 70.4% of the vote. The role is largely ceremonial. A landslide win is seen as a vote of confidence in the government, despite a recent slew of scandals involving PAP members.

More than 40 people were killed in the Democratic Republic of Congo when the army suppressed a protest against UN peacekeeping troops. The UN has called for an investigation and warned that the death toll may be higher. Its mission, one of the organisation’s most expensive, has been criticised for failing to protect civilians from militia violence.

Poland closed the biggest centre for Ukrainian refugees, as the numbers arriving are now “negligible”, according to a spokesperson for the province where it is located. At its peak, in spring of 2022, the centre in Nadarzyn (on the outskirts of Warsaw, the capital) housed 9,000 refugees. The 300 Ukrainians living there now will be transferred to other facilities.

Typhoon Saola headed towards China’s south-east coast. The typhoon—which has recorded wind speeds of 209kph—is expected to make landfall on late Friday or early Saturday. Around 800,000 people were evacuated from their homes. Hundreds of flights were cancelled in China’s Guangdong province, where the government issued their highest typhoon warning. In Hong Kong, authorities issued their second-highest storm alert.

Britain published revised data, showing that the size of its economy at the end of 2021 was larger than previously estimated. Final-quarter growth stood at 0.6% compared with the same period in 2019, according to Britain’s Office for National Statistics. It had originally said that the economy shrunk by 1.2%. Annual growth for all of 2021 was revised up by 1.1 percentage points, to 8.7%.

Word of the week: Friendshoring, when a government pushes businesses to restructure supply chains, shifting production away from geopolitical rivals to friendly powers. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Azerbaijan’s chokehold on Nagorno-Karabakh
Saturday marks 32 years since Armenian authorities in Nagorno-Karabakh, a disputed territory in the South Caucasus, declared independence from the Soviet Union. They will have little to celebrate.

Nagorno-Karabakh is formally part of Azerbaijan. But to ethnic Armenians living there, it is Artsakh, a self-declared republic. In a short but bloody war in 2020, Azerbaijan recaptured parts of the region it had lost to Armenia in an earlier conflict, which turned into a full blown war after the independence proclamation. Azerbaijan now wants the enclave’s Armenians to relinquish any dreams of autonomy or security guarantees.

For nine months Azerbaijan has blockaded the Lachin Corridor, the only road connecting Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia. Armenian officials say that food, medicine and basic necessities are increasingly scarce, and warn of an impending humanitarian catastrophe. Azerbaijan, in turn, has accused Armenia of using the corridor to supply the separatists with weapons. It has also provided an alternative route for humanitarian aid—through its own territory, so as to cement its control.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Scotland’s shifting politics
On Saturday, Scots who yearn for independence will march down the Royal Mile in Edinburgh to the Scottish Parliament. Humza Yousaf, the first minister, will speak, and though his message will resonate, he may struggle to translate that approval into votes.

Support for independence remains steady. But polls suggest that some former supporters of the ruling Scottish National Party, which came to power by campaigning for independence, are considering switching to the Labour Party in the next general election. Scots have become more realistic about the prospects of a new independence referendum since the Supreme Court ruled in November that it would require Westminster’s say-so. And the departure of Nicola Sturgeon, the former first minister, means that independence has lost its most powerful advocate.

Labour, which haemorrhaged support after the referendum of 2014, has a big opportunity. Its first test will come in October in a by-election. Labour may win back that seat—but the resilient independence dream will remain a thorn in Westminster’s side.


PHOTO: SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Native Americans’ ongoing bison tragedy
In 1870, 8m North American bison, or buffalo, roamed the continent. Twenty years later, only 500 remained. The causes of the near extinction are debated. Hide hunters (abetted by ammunition provided by the American government), drought and cattle-borne disease all contributed to the animals’ demise. The effects reverberate even today.

A new study in The Review of Economic Studies, a journal, shows how, for indigenous nations reliant on bison, their massacre was an economic cataclysm. In the mid-1800s members of these tribes were among the world’s tallest people, but in one generation they shrank by an inch, the implied cause being the loss of bison from their diets. Their child mortality rates were 16% higher than in tribes who never relied on bison. Right up to 2019, “bison nations” had lower incomes, employment levels and rates of property ownership. The findings stand as a stark reminder that ecological ruin cannot be undone—only prevented.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
India spoils Pakistan’s cricket party
Cricket-mad Pakistan has not hosted an international tournament since 2008. After terrorists attacked a bus carrying a visiting Sri Lankan squad in 2009, teams avoided travelling to the country. In recent years, though, some have returned as fears have eased. The full revival of international cricket on Pakistani soil was meant to happen this week with the hosting of the Asia Cup, a regional cricket tournament that began on August 30th.

But India has rained on that parade—heavily. The Indian cricket board refused to let its team travel to Pakistan, citing political tensions between the two countries. As a result, Pakistan was relegated to co-host. Only four of the tournament’s 13 matches will be played there, with the remaining held in Sri Lanka.

On Saturday Pakistanis might enjoy some revenge when their team takes on India in Colombo. But they may be denied even that pleasure. Weather forecasters expect the match to be rained off.


PHOTO: REUTERS
Weekend profile: Claudia Sheinbaum, Mexico’s likely next president
Claudia Sheinbaum closed her campaign to be the presidential candidate of Mexico’s ruling party, Morena, by promising continuity. “No steps back, nor steps to the right, only continuing the transformation,” she shouted on stage in the city of Verácruz on August 27th. Ms Sheinbaum is positioning herself as the person who would pick up the torch from President Andrés Manuel López Obrador, if she wins the general election next June.

First she must secure her spot as Morena’s candidate; the result of the party’s selection process will be announced on September 6th. The 61-year-old former mayor of Mexico City (a position equivalent to a state governor) has a strong lead in the polls, thanks in part to the obvious, if implicit, support from Mr López Obrador. She is almost certain to beat her closest contender, Marcelo Ebrard, a former foreign minister. Morena’s dominance of the country’s politics means that, failing a major upset, she will be Mexico’s next president. She would be its first female, and first Jewish, head of state.

Ms Sheinbaum grew up in a middle-class family in the capital, the daughter of two scientists who were active in the student protests of 1968 (which had the same pro-democracy tenor as those sweeping the rest of the world). She studied physics before completing a doctorate in environmental engineering at one of Mexico’s top universities. She joined Morena when Mr López Obrador founded it in 2014, and served as his minister when he was mayor of the capital.

She shares much of his ideology: a mixture of left-wing ideas, such as increasing social handouts, and nationalist ones, such as favouring state-owned companies over the private sector.

Between July 2018 and June 2023, Ms Sheibaum ran Mexico City herself. Her record suggests she would be more evidence-driven and competent than Mr López Obrador. Under her tenure murder rates in the city fell at a rate that outpaced the national level, and she handled the pandemic far better. Given her environmental background, she is unlikely to continue prioritising fossil fuels over clean energy. She may not have the charm or charisma of most politicians at her level, but she has substance and convictions. But Mexicans will only see what she is really made of when she emerges from Mr López Obrador’s shadow.


Weekly crossword
Our crossword has two sets of clues, one for seasoned cruciverbalists and the other for less experienced solvers. Both give the same answers, all of which feature in articles in this week’s edition of The Economist.

Email all four answers, along with your home city and country, by 9am GMT on Monday to crossword@economist.com. We will pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners in next week’s edition.

Cryptic clues

1 down Former leader who begs, half-urgently, to be reformed (6, 1, 4)

1 across In Beijing, row then hike (6)

2 across Rewind cassette featuring unknown foreigner (5)

3 across Barter goods in sturdy packaging (6)

Factual clues

1 down President who withdrew from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty in 2002 (6, 1, 4)

1 across What has been weaker than expected in China this year (6)

2 across An American in Paris, for example (5)

3 across What it was illegal for Medicare to do with drug companies, until recently (6)



The winners of this week’s quiz
Thank you to everyone who took part in this week’s quiz. The winners, chosen at random, were:

Mauricio Monroy, San Diego, California, America

Tor Alloway, London, England

Ron Toogood, Moncton, Canada

They all gave the correct answers of the Red Arrows, Fortune, the Troubles, I Have a Dream and Whips. The theme is words from Hamlet’s “To be or not to be” speech: arrows, fortune, troubles, dream and whips.

The questions were:

Monday: What is the name of the Royal Air Force aerobatic display team?

Tuesday: Which business magazine was founded by Henry Luce in 1929?

Wednesday: What two word term is often used to describe the period of civil conflict in Northern Ireland from the late 1960s to 1998?

Thursday: What is the famous phrase used to refer to the speech given by Martin Luther King in August 1963 at the end of a March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom?

Friday: What is the term for the politicians that enforce party discipline in both the UK and US legislatures, as well as many others?

Not all those who wander are lost.

J.R.R. Tolkien
