The world in brief
September 4, 2023
Catch up quickly on the global stories that matter

Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s president, said he would dismiss his defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, asking parliament to confirm Rostem Umerov, head of the state property fund, as his replacement. Rumours have long swirled about Mr Reznikov’s position. His deputy was fired in January amid allegations of corruption at the ministry (which Mr Reznikov has rejected). Ukrainska Pravda, a newspaper, reported on Thursday that his departure might be imminent.

Ukrainian troops breached Russia’s first defensive line near Zaporizhia, according to General Oleksandr Tarnavsky, who is leading Ukraine’s southern counter-offensive. The army’s efforts seem to be picking up speed as it takes advantage of the liberation on August 28th of Robotyne, a village south of Zaporizhia. Ukraine also said its air defences had shot down 22 of 25 drones aimed by Russia at the Odessa region. Those that got through hit port infrastructure on the river Danube.

An airstrike by Sudan’s army on a neighbourhood in Khartoum, the capital, killed at least 20 people, according to a local volunteer group. The Sudanese Armed Forces carries out strikes to target members of the Rapid Defence Forces, a paramilitary group it has been fighting since April. More than 5,000 civilians have been killed in the conflict and more than 2m displaced.

India’s space agency said that its rover on the Moon had been set to “sleep mode”; unless awakened it will remain dormant as “India’s lunar ambassador.” On August 23rd the unmanned craft from which it was deployed landed 600km from the Moon’s south pole. On Saturday India launched a rocket on a mission to study the sun and the solar winds that cause auroras.

Typhoon Haikui hit south-eastern Taiwan with wind speeds of 155kph. Nearly 3,000 people were evacuated from high-risk areas and hundreds of flights were cancelled. Haikui is now travelling east, towards southern China; it follows Saola, a stronger storm with wind speeds above 200kph, which caused extensive damage in Hong Kong, Macau and southern China on Saturday.

People attending Burning Man, an annual festival in the Nevada desert, were told to “shelter in place” after heavy rain on Saturday turned the camp to mud. The festival ends on Monday but 60,000-odd participants cannot leave, supplies cannot be brought in and toilets cannot be emptied. The burning of artworks, including a giant wooden man, has been postponed.

Max Verstappen, a Dutch racing driver, clocked up his tenth victory in a row—a record for Formula One—by winning the Italian Grand Prix. With eight of the 23 races to go, Mr Verstappen, the champion in 2021 and 2022, looks uncatchable once again. His stellar career is a credit to both his risky driving and superiority of his team’s cars.

Figure of the day: 45%, the proportion of Americans who listen to country music at least once a month. Read the full story.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Erdogan meets Putin over grain deal
Turkey’s NATO partners do not welcome Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s friendship with Vladimir Putin. Nor do they like Turkey’s willingness to benefit from Western sanctions to boost trade with Russia. But the relationship between the presidents may now be useful to the outside world.

On Monday Mr Erdogan will be in the Russian resort of Sochi to persuade Mr Putin to revive the grain deal the Turkish leader helped to broker last summer. That saw Russia relax its naval blockade of Ukraine, allowing 33m tonnes of grain and other food products to reach global markets—and countries facing hunger. Russia pulled out in July, accusing the West of disrupting its shipments of grain and fertiliser. Since then it has bombed Ukrainian ports.

Mr Putin has signalled he could renew the deal, but only once Western countries ease some of the sanctions against Russia. The UN has sent Russia a set of proposals. Mr Erdogan hopes to convince his friend to sign on the dotted line.


PHOTO: IMAGO
The Africa Climate Summit
The summit opening today in Nairobi, Kenya’s capital, is billed as the largest ever meeting on the continent dedicated to combating global warming. Expect statements slamming the inherent unfairness of the climate crisis: Africa has 18% of the world’s population but emits just 2-3% of greenhouse gases. (An American fridge uses more electricity than a typical African person.)

In recent years some international aid previously aimed at alleviating poverty in Africa has been diverted to deal with climate change globally. African leaders at the summit will call for the rich world to pay more to help them cope with a hotter continent without curbing their countries’ development. They will also put forward their own ideas for dealing with a warmer world, such as expanding local carbon-credit markets, ahead of COP28 in Dubai later in the year. Africa is barely responsible for the problem of climate change. But it wants to be part of the solution.



PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Europe’s other big tech legislation
This week the European Union will start to put into action another ambitious law to regulate big online platforms. The Digital Markets Act, which was passed last year, aims to level the playing field between large tech firms and their smaller rivals. The European Commission, the EU’s executive arm, will now designate which companies will have to comply with all of the DMA’s many provisions, such as not giving their own services preferential treatment over rivals’ offerings.

These “gatekeeper” firms are expected to include the usual big-tech suspects, from Alphabet to Meta, but also some surprises, such as Samsung, and ByteDance, which owns TikTok. Fines for repeated violations could reach 20% of worldwide annual sales—nearly $25bn in Meta’s case. As with the Digital Services Act, which is also being phased in and aims to regulate social media, the big question is whether the commission will be able to enforce the far-reaching rules.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Britain’s risky school buildings
The return to school after the summer holidays is usually a relief for parents. But in Britain this year’s is overshadowed by a safety scandal. Between the 1950s and 1980s many public buildings were built using “reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete”, a light, cheap material that unfortunately turned out to be prone to collapse. In 2018 a roof at a school in Kent caved in. Other incidents this summer sparked fresh worries.

Many classrooms that should have been repaired over the past decade were not, because of spending cuts. The Conservative government was slow to respond even as evidence of risks mounted. In June, a watchdog warned that it did not know how many schools in England were affected. On Friday, three days before the start of term, the government told 150 that they would have to close buildings. Some may be shut for months. “If you don’t hear, don’t worry,” said Gillian Keegan, the education secretary. That is unlikely to reassure parents, teachers or pupils.


PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES
Greece’s limit on visitors to the Parthenon
From Monday Greece’s culture ministry will begin to cap the number of tourists at the Parthenon temple at 20,000 each day. This summer saw record demand for online tickets to the rocky Acropolis hilltop, with up to 23,000 people visiting daily, most of them arriving before noon. The rise was partly driven by an increase in cruise-ship arrivals at Athens’s port, Piraeus.

Overtourism has long been an issue at Greece’s most popular ancient site, but since pandemic travel restrictions were lifted, demand has surged. Under the new timetable up to 3,000 visitors will be admitted every two hours. To ease overcrowding the ministry is also considering whether to re-open two additional 5th-century doorways at the marble Propylaia, the site’s monumental gateway and only entrance. Archaeologists are relieved that action is being taken but some worry that concrete walkways may be extended to make access easier, covering ancient statue bases and cuttings in the rock.


Daily quiz
Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to QuizEspresso@economist.com. We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

Monday: Which economist, who died earlier this year, won the Nobel prize for developing the hypothesis of rational expectations?

He who refuses to do arithmetic is doomed to talk nonsense.

John McCarthy
